{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf100
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The Brothers Karamazov\
\
                      Translated from the Russian of\
\
                            Fyodor Dostoyevsky\
\
                           by Constance Garnett\
\
                             The Lowell Press\
\
                                 New York\
\
\
\
\
\
CONTENTS\
\
\
Part I\
   Book I. The History Of A Family\
      Chapter I. Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov\
      Chapter II. He Gets Rid Of His Eldest Son\
      Chapter III. The Second Marriage And The Second Family\
      Chapter IV. The Third Son, Alyosha\
      Chapter V. Elders\
   Book II. An Unfortunate Gathering\
      Chapter I. They Arrive At The Monastery\
      Chapter II. The Old Buffoon\
      Chapter III. Peasant Women Who Have Faith\
      Chapter IV. A Lady Of Little Faith\
      Chapter V. So Be It! So Be It!\
      Chapter VI. Why Is Such A Man Alive?\
      Chapter VII. A Young Man Bent On A Career\
      Chapter VIII. The Scandalous Scene\
   Book III. The Sensualists\
      Chapter I. In The Servants\'92 Quarters\
      Chapter II. Lizaveta\
      Chapter III. The Confession Of A Passionate Heart\'97In Verse\
      Chapter IV. The Confession Of A Passionate Heart\'97In Anecdote\
      Chapter V. The Confession Of A Passionate Heart\'97"Heels Up"\
      Chapter VI. Smerdyakov\
      Chapter VII. The Controversy\
      Chapter VIII. Over The Brandy\
      Chapter IX. The Sensualists\
      Chapter X. Both Together\
      Chapter XI. Another Reputation Ruined\
Part II\
   Book IV. Lacerations\
      Chapter I. Father Ferapont\
      Chapter II. At His Father\'92s\
      Chapter III. A Meeting With The Schoolboys\
      Chapter IV. At The Hohlakovs\'92\
      Chapter V. A Laceration In The Drawing\uc0\u8208 Room\
      Chapter VI. A Laceration In The Cottage\
      Chapter VII. And In The Open Air\
   Book V. Pro And Contra\
      Chapter I. The Engagement\
      Chapter II. Smerdyakov With A Guitar\
      Chapter III. The Brothers Make Friends\
      Chapter IV. Rebellion\
      Chapter V. The Grand Inquisitor\
      Chapter VI. For Awhile A Very Obscure One\
      Chapter VII. \'93It\'92s Always Worth While Speaking To A Clever Man\'94\
   Book VI. The Russian Monk\
      Chapter I. Father Zossima And His Visitors\
      Chapter II. The Duel\
      Chapter III. Conversations And Exhortations Of Father Zossima\
Part III\
   Book VII. Alyosha\
      Chapter I. The Breath Of Corruption\
      Chapter II. A Critical Moment\
      Chapter III. An Onion\
      Chapter IV. Cana Of Galilee\
   Book VIII. Mitya\
      Chapter I. Kuzma Samsonov\
      Chapter II. Lyagavy\
      Chapter III. Gold\uc0\u8208 Mines\
      Chapter IV. In The Dark\
      Chapter V. A Sudden Resolution\
      Chapter VI. \'93I Am Coming, Too!\'94\
      Chapter VII. The First And Rightful Lover\
      Chapter VIII. Delirium\
   Book IX. The Preliminary Investigation\
      Chapter I. The Beginning Of Perhotin\'92s Official Career\
      Chapter II. The Alarm\
      Chapter III. The Sufferings Of A Soul, The First Ordeal\
      Chapter IV. The Second Ordeal\
      Chapter V. The Third Ordeal\
      Chapter VI. The Prosecutor Catches Mitya\
      Chapter VII. Mitya\'92s Great Secret. Received With Hisses\
      Chapter VIII. The Evidence Of The Witnesses. The Babe\
      Chapter IX. They Carry Mitya Away\
Part IV\
   Book X. The Boys\
      Chapter I. Kolya Krassotkin\
      Chapter II. Children\
      Chapter III. The Schoolboy\
      Chapter IV. The Lost Dog\
      Chapter V. By Ilusha\'92s Bedside\
      Chapter VI. Precocity\
      Chapter VII. Ilusha\
   Book XI. Ivan\
      Chapter I. At Grushenka\'92s\
      Chapter II. The Injured Foot\
      Chapter III. A Little Demon\
      Chapter IV. A Hymn And A Secret\
      Chapter V. Not You, Not You!\
      Chapter VI. The First Interview With Smerdyakov\
      Chapter VII. The Second Visit To Smerdyakov\
      Chapter VIII. The Third And Last Interview With Smerdyakov\
      Chapter IX. The Devil. Ivan\'92s Nightmare\
      Chapter X. \'93It Was He Who Said That\'94\
   Book XII. A Judicial Error\
      Chapter I. The Fatal Day\
      Chapter II. Dangerous Witnesses\
      Chapter III. The Medical Experts And A Pound Of Nuts\
      Chapter IV. Fortune Smiles On Mitya\
      Chapter V. A Sudden Catastrophe\
      Chapter VI. The Prosecutor\'92s Speech. Sketches Of Character\
      Chapter VII. An Historical Survey\
      Chapter VIII. A Treatise On Smerdyakov\
      Chapter IX. The Galloping Troika. The End Of The Prosecutor\'92s\
      Speech.\
      Chapter X. The Speech For The Defense. An Argument That Cuts Both\
      Ways\
      Chapter XI. There Was No Money. There Was No Robbery\
      Chapter XII. And There Was No Murder Either\
      Chapter XIII. A Corrupter Of Thought\
      Chapter XIV. The Peasants Stand Firm\
Epilogue\
   Chapter I. Plans For Mitya\'92s Escape\
   Chapter II. For A Moment The Lie Becomes Truth\
   Chapter III. Ilusha\'92s Funeral. The Speech At The Stone\
Footnotes\
\
\
\
\
\
\
PART I\
\
\
\
\
Book I. The History Of A Family\
\
\
\
Chapter I. Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov\
\
\
Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov was the third son of Fyodor Pavlovitch\
Karamazov, a land owner well known in our district in his own day, and\
still remembered among us owing to his gloomy and tragic death, which\
happened thirteen years ago, and which I shall describe in its proper\
place. For the present I will only say that this \'93landowner\'94\'97for so we\
used to call him, although he hardly spent a day of his life on his own\
estate\'97was a strange type, yet one pretty frequently to be met with, a\
type abject and vicious and at the same time senseless. But he was one of\
those senseless persons who are very well capable of looking after their\
worldly affairs, and, apparently, after nothing else. Fyodor Pavlovitch,\
for instance, began with next to nothing; his estate was of the smallest;\
he ran to dine at other men\'92s tables, and fastened on them as a toady, yet\
at his death it appeared that he had a hundred thousand roubles in hard\
cash. At the same time, he was all his life one of the most senseless,\
fantastical fellows in the whole district. I repeat, it was not\
stupidity\'97the majority of these fantastical fellows are shrewd and\
intelligent enough\'97but just senselessness, and a peculiar national form of\
it.\
\
He was married twice, and had three sons, the eldest, Dmitri, by his first\
wife, and two, Ivan and Alexey, by his second. Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s first\
wife, Adela\'efda Ivanovna, belonged to a fairly rich and distinguished noble\
family, also landowners in our district, the Mi\'fcsovs. How it came to pass\
that an heiress, who was also a beauty, and moreover one of those\
vigorous, intelligent girls, so common in this generation, but sometimes\
also to be found in the last, could have married such a worthless, puny\
weakling, as we all called him, I won\'92t attempt to explain. I knew a young\
lady of the last \'93romantic\'94 generation who after some years of an\
enigmatic passion for a gentleman, whom she might quite easily have\
married at any moment, invented insuperable obstacles to their union, and\
ended by throwing herself one stormy night into a rather deep and rapid\
river from a high bank, almost a precipice, and so perished, entirely to\
satisfy her own caprice, and to be like Shakespeare\'92s Ophelia. Indeed, if\
this precipice, a chosen and favorite spot of hers, had been less\
picturesque, if there had been a prosaic flat bank in its place, most\
likely the suicide would never have taken place. This is a fact, and\
probably there have been not a few similar instances in the last two or\
three generations. Adela\'efda Ivanovna Mi\'fcsov\'92s action was similarly, no\
doubt, an echo of other people\'92s ideas, and was due to the irritation\
caused by lack of mental freedom. She wanted, perhaps, to show her\
feminine independence, to override class distinctions and the despotism of\
her family. And a pliable imagination persuaded her, we must suppose, for\
a brief moment, that Fyodor Pavlovitch, in spite of his parasitic\
position, was one of the bold and ironical spirits of that progressive\
epoch, though he was, in fact, an ill\uc0\u8208 natured buffoon and nothing more.\
What gave the marriage piquancy was that it was preceded by an elopement,\
and this greatly captivated Adela\'efda Ivanovna\'92s fancy. Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s\
position at the time made him specially eager for any such enterprise, for\
he was passionately anxious to make a career in one way or another. To\
attach himself to a good family and obtain a dowry was an alluring\
prospect. As for mutual love it did not exist apparently, either in the\
bride or in him, in spite of Adela\'efda Ivanovna\'92s beauty. This was,\
perhaps, a unique case of the kind in the life of Fyodor Pavlovitch, who\
was always of a voluptuous temper, and ready to run after any petticoat on\
the slightest encouragement. She seems to have been the only woman who\
made no particular appeal to his senses.\
\
Immediately after the elopement Adela\'efda Ivanovna discerned in a flash\
that she had no feeling for her husband but contempt. The marriage\
accordingly showed itself in its true colors with extraordinary rapidity.\
Although the family accepted the event pretty quickly and apportioned the\
runaway bride her dowry, the husband and wife began to lead a most\
disorderly life, and there were everlasting scenes between them. It was\
said that the young wife showed incomparably more generosity and dignity\
than Fyodor Pavlovitch, who, as is now known, got hold of all her money up\
to twenty\uc0\u8208 five thousand roubles as soon as she received it, so that those\
thousands were lost to her for ever. The little village and the rather\
fine town house which formed part of her dowry he did his utmost for a\
long time to transfer to his name, by means of some deed of conveyance. He\
would probably have succeeded, merely from her moral fatigue and desire to\
get rid of him, and from the contempt and loathing he aroused by his\
persistent and shameless importunity. But, fortunately, Adela\'efda\
Ivanovna\'92s family intervened and circumvented his greediness. It is known\
for a fact that frequent fights took place between the husband and wife,\
but rumor had it that Fyodor Pavlovitch did not beat his wife but was\
beaten by her, for she was a hot\uc0\u8208 tempered, bold, dark\u8208 browed, impatient\
woman, possessed of remarkable physical strength. Finally, she left the\
house and ran away from Fyodor Pavlovitch with a destitute divinity\
student, leaving Mitya, a child of three years old, in her husband\'92s\
hands. Immediately Fyodor Pavlovitch introduced a regular harem into the\
house, and abandoned himself to orgies of drunkenness. In the intervals he\
used to drive all over the province, complaining tearfully to each and all\
of Adela\'efda Ivanovna\'92s having left him, going into details too disgraceful\
for a husband to mention in regard to his own married life. What seemed to\
gratify him and flatter his self\uc0\u8208 love most was to play the ridiculous part\
of the injured husband, and to parade his woes with embellishments.\
\
\'93One would think that you\'92d got a promotion, Fyodor Pavlovitch, you seem\
so pleased in spite of your sorrow,\'94 scoffers said to him. Many even added\
that he was glad of a new comic part in which to play the buffoon, and\
that it was simply to make it funnier that he pretended to be unaware of\
his ludicrous position. But, who knows, it may have been simplicity. At\
last he succeeded in getting on the track of his runaway wife. The poor\
woman turned out to be in Petersburg, where she had gone with her divinity\
student, and where she had thrown herself into a life of complete\
emancipation. Fyodor Pavlovitch at once began bustling about, making\
preparations to go to Petersburg, with what object he could not himself\
have said. He would perhaps have really gone; but having determined to do\
so he felt at once entitled to fortify himself for the journey by another\
bout of reckless drinking. And just at that time his wife\'92s family\
received the news of her death in Petersburg. She had died quite suddenly\
in a garret, according to one story, of typhus, or as another version had\
it, of starvation. Fyodor Pavlovitch was drunk when he heard of his wife\'92s\
death, and the story is that he ran out into the street and began shouting\
with joy, raising his hands to Heaven: \'93Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant\
depart in peace,\'94 but others say he wept without restraint like a little\
child, so much so that people were sorry for him, in spite of the\
repulsion he inspired. It is quite possible that both versions were true,\
that he rejoiced at his release, and at the same time wept for her who\
released him. As a general rule, people, even the wicked, are much more\
na\'efve and simple\uc0\u8208 hearted than we suppose. And we ourselves are, too.\
\
\
\
Chapter II. He Gets Rid Of His Eldest Son\
\
\
You can easily imagine what a father such a man could be and how he would\
bring up his children. His behavior as a father was exactly what might be\
expected. He completely abandoned the child of his marriage with Adela\'efda\
Ivanovna, not from malice, nor because of his matrimonial grievances, but\
simply because he forgot him. While he was wearying every one with his\
tears and complaints, and turning his house into a sink of debauchery, a\
faithful servant of the family, Grigory, took the three\uc0\u8208 year\u8208 old Mitya\
into his care. If he hadn\'92t looked after him there would have been no one\
even to change the baby\'92s little shirt.\
\
It happened moreover that the child\'92s relations on his mother\'92s side\
forgot him too at first. His grandfather was no longer living, his widow,\
Mitya\'92s grandmother, had moved to Moscow, and was seriously ill, while his\
daughters were married, so that Mitya remained for almost a whole year in\
old Grigory\'92s charge and lived with him in the servant\'92s cottage. But if\
his father had remembered him (he could not, indeed, have been altogether\
unaware of his existence) he would have sent him back to the cottage, as\
the child would only have been in the way of his debaucheries. But a\
cousin of Mitya\'92s mother, Pyotr Alexandrovitch Mi\'fcsov, happened to return\
from Paris. He lived for many years afterwards abroad, but was at that\
time quite a young man, and distinguished among the Mi\'fcsovs as a man of\
enlightened ideas and of European culture, who had been in the capitals\
and abroad. Towards the end of his life he became a Liberal of the type\
common in the forties and fifties. In the course of his career he had come\
into contact with many of the most Liberal men of his epoch, both in\
Russia and abroad. He had known Proudhon and Bakunin personally, and in\
his declining years was very fond of describing the three days of the\
Paris Revolution of February 1848, hinting that he himself had almost\
taken part in the fighting on the barricades. This was one of the most\
grateful recollections of his youth. He had an independent property of\
about a thousand souls, to reckon in the old style. His splendid estate\
lay on the outskirts of our little town and bordered on the lands of our\
famous monastery, with which Pyotr Alexandrovitch began an endless\
lawsuit, almost as soon as he came into the estate, concerning the rights\
of fishing in the river or wood\uc0\u8208 cutting in the forest, I don\'92t know\
exactly which. He regarded it as his duty as a citizen and a man of\
culture to open an attack upon the \'93clericals.\'94 Hearing all about Adela\'efda\
Ivanovna, whom he, of course, remembered, and in whom he had at one time\
been interested, and learning of the existence of Mitya, he intervened, in\
spite of all his youthful indignation and contempt for Fyodor Pavlovitch.\
He made the latter\'92s acquaintance for the first time, and told him\
directly that he wished to undertake the child\'92s education. He used long\
afterwards to tell as a characteristic touch, that when he began to speak\
of Mitya, Fyodor Pavlovitch looked for some time as though he did not\
understand what child he was talking about, and even as though he was\
surprised to hear that he had a little son in the house. The story may\
have been exaggerated, yet it must have been something like the truth.\
\
Fyodor Pavlovitch was all his life fond of acting, of suddenly playing an\
unexpected part, sometimes without any motive for doing so, and even to\
his own direct disadvantage, as, for instance, in the present case. This\
habit, however, is characteristic of a very great number of people, some\
of them very clever ones, not like Fyodor Pavlovitch. Pyotr Alexandrovitch\
carried the business through vigorously, and was appointed, with Fyodor\
Pavlovitch, joint guardian of the child, who had a small property, a house\
and land, left him by his mother. Mitya did, in fact, pass into this\
cousin\'92s keeping, but as the latter had no family of his own, and after\
securing the revenues of his estates was in haste to return at once to\
Paris, he left the boy in charge of one of his cousins, a lady living in\
Moscow. It came to pass that, settling permanently in Paris he, too,\
forgot the child, especially when the Revolution of February broke out,\
making an impression on his mind that he remembered all the rest of his\
life. The Moscow lady died, and Mitya passed into the care of one of her\
married daughters. I believe he changed his home a fourth time later on. I\
won\'92t enlarge upon that now, as I shall have much to tell later of Fyodor\
Pavlovitch\'92s firstborn, and must confine myself now to the most essential\
facts about him, without which I could not begin my story.\
\
In the first place, this Mitya, or rather Dmitri Fyodorovitch, was the\
only one of Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s three sons who grew up in the belief that\
he had property, and that he would be independent on coming of age. He\
spent an irregular boyhood and youth. He did not finish his studies at the\
gymnasium, he got into a military school, then went to the Caucasus, was\
promoted, fought a duel, and was degraded to the ranks, earned promotion\
again, led a wild life, and spent a good deal of money. He did not begin\
to receive any income from Fyodor Pavlovitch until he came of age, and\
until then got into debt. He saw and knew his father, Fyodor Pavlovitch,\
for the first time on coming of age, when he visited our neighborhood on\
purpose to settle with him about his property. He seems not to have liked\
his father. He did not stay long with him, and made haste to get away,\
having only succeeded in obtaining a sum of money, and entering into an\
agreement for future payments from the estate, of the revenues and value\
of which he was unable (a fact worthy of note), upon this occasion, to get\
a statement from his father. Fyodor Pavlovitch remarked for the first time\
then (this, too, should be noted) that Mitya had a vague and exaggerated\
idea of his property. Fyodor Pavlovitch was very well satisfied with this,\
as it fell in with his own designs. He gathered only that the young man\
was frivolous, unruly, of violent passions, impatient, and dissipated, and\
that if he could only obtain ready money he would be satisfied, although\
only, of course, for a short time. So Fyodor Pavlovitch began to take\
advantage of this fact, sending him from time to time small doles,\
installments. In the end, when four years later, Mitya, losing patience,\
came a second time to our little town to settle up once for all with his\
father, it turned out to his amazement that he had nothing, that it was\
difficult to get an account even, that he had received the whole value of\
his property in sums of money from Fyodor Pavlovitch, and was perhaps even\
in debt to him, that by various agreements into which he had, of his own\
desire, entered at various previous dates, he had no right to expect\
anything more, and so on, and so on. The young man was overwhelmed,\
suspected deceit and cheating, and was almost beside himself. And, indeed,\
this circumstance led to the catastrophe, the account of which forms the\
subject of my first introductory story, or rather the external side of it.\
But before I pass to that story I must say a little of Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s\
other two sons, and of their origin.\
\
\
\
Chapter III. The Second Marriage And The Second Family\
\
\
Very shortly after getting his four\uc0\u8208 year\u8208 old Mitya off his hands Fyodor\
Pavlovitch married a second time. His second marriage lasted eight years.\
He took this second wife, Sofya Ivanovna, also a very young girl, from\
another province, where he had gone upon some small piece of business in\
company with a Jew. Though Fyodor Pavlovitch was a drunkard and a vicious\
debauchee he never neglected investing his capital, and managed his\
business affairs very successfully, though, no doubt, not over\uc0\u8208 \
scrupulously. Sofya Ivanovna was the daughter of an obscure deacon, and\
was left from childhood an orphan without relations. She grew up in the\
house of a general\'92s widow, a wealthy old lady of good position, who was\
at once her benefactress and tormentor. I do not know the details, but I\
have only heard that the orphan girl, a meek and gentle creature, was once\
cut down from a halter in which she was hanging from a nail in the loft,\
so terrible were her sufferings from the caprice and everlasting nagging\
of this old woman, who was apparently not bad\uc0\u8208 hearted but had become an\
insufferable tyrant through idleness.\
\
Fyodor Pavlovitch made her an offer; inquiries were made about him and he\
was refused. But again, as in his first marriage, he proposed an elopement\
to the orphan girl. There is very little doubt that she would not on any\
account have married him if she had known a little more about him in time.\
But she lived in another province; besides, what could a little girl of\
sixteen know about it, except that she would be better at the bottom of\
the river than remaining with her benefactress. So the poor child\
exchanged a benefactress for a benefactor. Fyodor Pavlovitch did not get a\
penny this time, for the general\'92s widow was furious. She gave them\
nothing and cursed them both. But he had not reckoned on a dowry; what\
allured him was the remarkable beauty of the innocent girl, above all her\
innocent appearance, which had a peculiar attraction for a vicious\
profligate, who had hitherto admired only the coarser types of feminine\
beauty.\
\
\'93Those innocent eyes slit my soul up like a razor,\'94 he used to say\
afterwards, with his loathsome snigger. In a man so depraved this might,\
of course, mean no more than sensual attraction. As he had received no\
dowry with his wife, and had, so to speak, taken her \'93from the halter,\'94 he\
did not stand on ceremony with her. Making her feel that she had \'93wronged\'94\
him, he took advantage of her phenomenal meekness and submissiveness to\
trample on the elementary decencies of marriage. He gathered loose women\
into his house, and carried on orgies of debauchery in his wife\'92s\
presence. To show what a pass things had come to, I may mention that\
Grigory, the gloomy, stupid, obstinate, argumentative servant, who had\
always hated his first mistress, Adela\'efda Ivanovna, took the side of his\
new mistress. He championed her cause, abusing Fyodor Pavlovitch in a\
manner little befitting a servant, and on one occasion broke up the revels\
and drove all the disorderly women out of the house. In the end this\
unhappy young woman, kept in terror from her childhood, fell into that\
kind of nervous disease which is most frequently found in peasant women\
who are said to be \'93possessed by devils.\'94 At times after terrible fits of\
hysterics she even lost her reason. Yet she bore Fyodor Pavlovitch two\
sons, Ivan and Alexey, the eldest in the first year of marriage and the\
second three years later. When she died, little Alexey was in his fourth\
year, and, strange as it seems, I know that he remembered his mother all\
his life, like a dream, of course. At her death almost exactly the same\
thing happened to the two little boys as to their elder brother, Mitya.\
They were completely forgotten and abandoned by their father. They were\
looked after by the same Grigory and lived in his cottage, where they were\
found by the tyrannical old lady who had brought up their mother. She was\
still alive, and had not, all those eight years, forgotten the insult done\
her. All that time she was obtaining exact information as to her Sofya\'92s\
manner of life, and hearing of her illness and hideous surroundings she\
declared aloud two or three times to her retainers:\
\
\'93It serves her right. God has punished her for her ingratitude.\'94\
\
Exactly three months after Sofya Ivanovna\'92s death the general\'92s widow\
suddenly appeared in our town, and went straight to Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s\
house. She spent only half an hour in the town but she did a great deal.\
It was evening. Fyodor Pavlovitch, whom she had not seen for those eight\
years, came in to her drunk. The story is that instantly upon seeing him,\
without any sort of explanation, she gave him two good, resounding slaps\
on the face, seized him by a tuft of hair, and shook him three times up\
and down. Then, without a word, she went straight to the cottage to the\
two boys. Seeing, at the first glance, that they were unwashed and in\
dirty linen, she promptly gave Grigory, too, a box on the ear, and\
announcing that she would carry off both the children she wrapped them\
just as they were in a rug, put them in the carriage, and drove off to her\
own town. Grigory accepted the blow like a devoted slave, without a word,\
and when he escorted the old lady to her carriage he made her a low bow\
and pronounced impressively that, \'93God would repay her for the orphans.\'94\
\'93You are a blockhead all the same,\'94 the old lady shouted to him as she\
drove away.\
\
Fyodor Pavlovitch, thinking it over, decided that it was a good thing, and\
did not refuse the general\'92s widow his formal consent to any proposition\
in regard to his children\'92s education. As for the slaps she had given him,\
he drove all over the town telling the story.\
\
It happened that the old lady died soon after this, but she left the boys\
in her will a thousand roubles each \'93for their instruction, and so that\
all be spent on them exclusively, with the condition that it be so\
portioned out as to last till they are twenty\uc0\u8208 one, for it is more than\
adequate provision for such children. If other people think fit to throw\
away their money, let them.\'94 I have not read the will myself, but I heard\
there was something queer of the sort, very whimsically expressed. The\
principal heir, Yefim Petrovitch Polenov, the Marshal of Nobility of the\
province, turned out, however, to be an honest man. Writing to Fyodor\
Pavlovitch, and discerning at once that he could extract nothing from him\
for his children\'92s education (though the latter never directly refused but\
only procrastinated as he always did in such cases, and was, indeed, at\
times effusively sentimental), Yefim Petrovitch took a personal interest\
in the orphans. He became especially fond of the younger, Alexey, who\
lived for a long while as one of his family. I beg the reader to note this\
from the beginning. And to Yefim Petrovitch, a man of a generosity and\
humanity rarely to be met with, the young people were more indebted for\
their education and bringing up than to any one. He kept the two thousand\
roubles left to them by the general\'92s widow intact, so that by the time\
they came of age their portions had been doubled by the accumulation of\
interest. He educated them both at his own expense, and certainly spent\
far more than a thousand roubles upon each of them. I won\'92t enter into a\
detailed account of their boyhood and youth, but will only mention a few\
of the most important events. Of the elder, Ivan, I will only say that he\
grew into a somewhat morose and reserved, though far from timid boy. At\
ten years old he had realized that they were living not in their own home\
but on other people\'92s charity, and that their father was a man of whom it\
was disgraceful to speak. This boy began very early, almost in his infancy\
(so they say at least), to show a brilliant and unusual aptitude for\
learning. I don\'92t know precisely why, but he left the family of Yefim\
Petrovitch when he was hardly thirteen, entering a Moscow gymnasium, and\
boarding with an experienced and celebrated teacher, an old friend of\
Yefim Petrovitch. Ivan used to declare afterwards that this was all due to\
the \'93ardor for good works\'94 of Yefim Petrovitch, who was captivated by the\
idea that the boy\'92s genius should be trained by a teacher of genius. But\
neither Yefim Petrovitch nor this teacher was living when the young man\
finished at the gymnasium and entered the university. As Yefim Petrovitch\
had made no provision for the payment of the tyrannical old lady\'92s legacy,\
which had grown from one thousand to two, it was delayed, owing to\
formalities inevitable in Russia, and the young man was in great straits\
for the first two years at the university, as he was forced to keep\
himself all the time he was studying. It must be noted that he did not\
even attempt to communicate with his father, perhaps from pride, from\
contempt for him, or perhaps from his cool common sense, which told him\
that from such a father he would get no real assistance. However that may\
have been, the young man was by no means despondent and succeeded in\
getting work, at first giving sixpenny lessons and afterwards getting\
paragraphs on street incidents into the newspapers under the signature of\
\'93Eye\uc0\u8208 Witness.\'94 These paragraphs, it was said, were so interesting and\
piquant that they were soon taken. This alone showed the young man\'92s\
practical and intellectual superiority over the masses of needy and\
unfortunate students of both sexes who hang about the offices of the\
newspapers and journals, unable to think of anything better than\
everlasting entreaties for copying and translations from the French.\
Having once got into touch with the editors Ivan Fyodorovitch always kept\
up his connection with them, and in his latter years at the university he\
published brilliant reviews of books upon various special subjects, so\
that he became well known in literary circles. But only in his last year\
he suddenly succeeded in attracting the attention of a far wider circle of\
readers, so that a great many people noticed and remembered him. It was\
rather a curious incident. When he had just left the university and was\
preparing to go abroad upon his two thousand roubles, Ivan Fyodorovitch\
published in one of the more important journals a strange article, which\
attracted general notice, on a subject of which he might have been\
supposed to know nothing, as he was a student of natural science. The\
article dealt with a subject which was being debated everywhere at the\
time\'97the position of the ecclesiastical courts. After discussing several\
opinions on the subject he went on to explain his own view. What was most\
striking about the article was its tone, and its unexpected conclusion.\
Many of the Church party regarded him unquestioningly as on their side.\
And yet not only the secularists but even atheists joined them in their\
applause. Finally some sagacious persons opined that the article was\
nothing but an impudent satirical burlesque. I mention this incident\
particularly because this article penetrated into the famous monastery in\
our neighborhood, where the inmates, being particularly interested in the\
question of the ecclesiastical courts, were completely bewildered by it.\
Learning the author\'92s name, they were interested in his being a native of\
the town and the son of \'93that Fyodor Pavlovitch.\'94 And just then it was\
that the author himself made his appearance among us.\
\
Why Ivan Fyodorovitch had come amongst us I remember asking myself at the\
time with a certain uneasiness. This fateful visit, which was the first\
step leading to so many consequences, I never fully explained to myself.\
It seemed strange on the face of it that a young man so learned, so proud,\
and apparently so cautious, should suddenly visit such an infamous house\
and a father who had ignored him all his life, hardly knew him, never\
thought of him, and would not under any circumstances have given him\
money, though he was always afraid that his sons Ivan and Alexey would\
also come to ask him for it. And here the young man was staying in the\
house of such a father, had been living with him for two months, and they\
were on the best possible terms. This last fact was a special cause of\
wonder to many others as well as to me. Pyotr Alexandrovitch Mi\'fcsov, of\
whom we have spoken already, the cousin of Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s first wife,\
happened to be in the neighborhood again on a visit to his estate. He had\
come from Paris, which was his permanent home. I remember that he was more\
surprised than any one when he made the acquaintance of the young man, who\
interested him extremely, and with whom he sometimes argued and not\
without an inner pang compared himself in acquirements.\
\
\'93He is proud,\'94 he used to say, \'93he will never be in want of pence; he has\
got money enough to go abroad now. What does he want here? Every one can\
see that he hasn\'92t come for money, for his father would never give him\
any. He has no taste for drink and dissipation, and yet his father can\'92t\
do without him. They get on so well together!\'94\
\
That was the truth; the young man had an unmistakable influence over his\
father, who positively appeared to be behaving more decently and even\
seemed at times ready to obey his son, though often extremely and even\
spitefully perverse.\
\
It was only later that we learned that Ivan had come partly at the request\
of, and in the interests of, his elder brother, Dmitri, whom he saw for\
the first time on this very visit, though he had before leaving Moscow\
been in correspondence with him about an important matter of more concern\
to Dmitri than himself. What that business was the reader will learn fully\
in due time. Yet even when I did know of this special circumstance I still\
felt Ivan Fyodorovitch to be an enigmatic figure, and thought his visit\
rather mysterious.\
\
I may add that Ivan appeared at the time in the light of a mediator\
between his father and his elder brother Dmitri, who was in open quarrel\
with his father and even planning to bring an action against him.\
\
The family, I repeat, was now united for the first time, and some of its\
members met for the first time in their lives. The younger brother,\
Alexey, had been a year already among us, having been the first of the\
three to arrive. It is of that brother Alexey I find it most difficult to\
speak in this introduction. Yet I must give some preliminary account of\
him, if only to explain one queer fact, which is that I have to introduce\
my hero to the reader wearing the cassock of a novice. Yes, he had been\
for the last year in our monastery, and seemed willing to be cloistered\
there for the rest of his life.\
\
\
\
Chapter IV. The Third Son, Alyosha\
\
\
He was only twenty, his brother Ivan was in his twenty\uc0\u8208 fourth year at the\
time, while their elder brother Dmitri was twenty\uc0\u8208 seven. First of all, I\
must explain that this young man, Alyosha, was not a fanatic, and, in my\
opinion at least, was not even a mystic. I may as well give my full\
opinion from the beginning. He was simply an early lover of humanity, and\
that he adopted the monastic life was simply because at that time it\
struck him, so to say, as the ideal escape for his soul struggling from\
the darkness of worldly wickedness to the light of love. And the reason\
this life struck him in this way was that he found in it at that time, as\
he thought, an extraordinary being, our celebrated elder, Zossima, to whom\
he became attached with all the warm first love of his ardent heart. But I\
do not dispute that he was very strange even at that time, and had been so\
indeed from his cradle. I have mentioned already, by the way, that though\
he lost his mother in his fourth year he remembered her all his life\'97her\
face, her caresses, \'93as though she stood living before me.\'94 Such memories\
may persist, as every one knows, from an even earlier age, even from two\
years old, but scarcely standing out through a whole lifetime like spots\
of light out of darkness, like a corner torn out of a huge picture, which\
has all faded and disappeared except that fragment. That is how it was\
with him. He remembered one still summer evening, an open window, the\
slanting rays of the setting sun (that he recalled most vividly of all);\
in a corner of the room the holy image, before it a lighted lamp, and on\
her knees before the image his mother, sobbing hysterically with cries and\
moans, snatching him up in both arms, squeezing him close till it hurt,\
and praying for him to the Mother of God, holding him out in both arms to\
the image as though to put him under the Mother\'92s protection ... and\
suddenly a nurse runs in and snatches him from her in terror. That was the\
picture! And Alyosha remembered his mother\'92s face at that minute. He used\
to say that it was frenzied but beautiful as he remembered. But he rarely\
cared to speak of this memory to any one. In his childhood and youth he\
was by no means expansive, and talked little indeed, but not from shyness\
or a sullen unsociability; quite the contrary, from something different,\
from a sort of inner preoccupation entirely personal and unconcerned with\
other people, but so important to him that he seemed, as it were, to\
forget others on account of it. But he was fond of people: he seemed\
throughout his life to put implicit trust in people: yet no one ever\
looked on him as a simpleton or na\'efve person. There was something about\
him which made one feel at once (and it was so all his life afterwards)\
that he did not care to be a judge of others\'97that he would never take it\
upon himself to criticize and would never condemn any one for anything. He\
seemed, indeed, to accept everything without the least condemnation though\
often grieving bitterly: and this was so much so that no one could\
surprise or frighten him even in his earliest youth. Coming at twenty to\
his father\'92s house, which was a very sink of filthy debauchery, he, chaste\
and pure as he was, simply withdrew in silence when to look on was\
unbearable, but without the slightest sign of contempt or condemnation.\
His father, who had once been in a dependent position, and so was\
sensitive and ready to take offense, met him at first with distrust and\
sullenness. \'93He does not say much,\'94 he used to say, \'93and thinks the more.\'94\
But soon, within a fortnight indeed, he took to embracing him and kissing\
him terribly often, with drunken tears, with sottish sentimentality, yet\
he evidently felt a real and deep affection for him, such as he had never\
been capable of feeling for any one before.\
\
Every one, indeed, loved this young man wherever he went, and it was so\
from his earliest childhood. When he entered the household of his patron\
and benefactor, Yefim Petrovitch Polenov, he gained the hearts of all the\
family, so that they looked on him quite as their own child. Yet he\
entered the house at such a tender age that he could not have acted from\
design nor artfulness in winning affection. So that the gift of making\
himself loved directly and unconsciously was inherent in him, in his very\
nature, so to speak. It was the same at school, though he seemed to be\
just one of those children who are distrusted, sometimes ridiculed, and\
even disliked by their schoolfellows. He was dreamy, for instance, and\
rather solitary. From his earliest childhood he was fond of creeping into\
a corner to read, and yet he was a general favorite all the while he was\
at school. He was rarely playful or merry, but any one could see at the\
first glance that this was not from any sullenness. On the contrary he was\
bright and good\uc0\u8208 tempered. He never tried to show off among his\
schoolfellows. Perhaps because of this, he was never afraid of any one,\
yet the boys immediately understood that he was not proud of his\
fearlessness and seemed to be unaware that he was bold and courageous. He\
never resented an insult. It would happen that an hour after the offense\
he would address the offender or answer some question with as trustful and\
candid an expression as though nothing had happened between them. And it\
was not that he seemed to have forgotten or intentionally forgiven the\
affront, but simply that he did not regard it as an affront, and this\
completely conquered and captivated the boys. He had one characteristic\
which made all his schoolfellows from the bottom class to the top want to\
mock at him, not from malice but because it amused them. This\
characteristic was a wild fanatical modesty and chastity. He could not\
bear to hear certain words and certain conversations about women. There\
are \'93certain\'94 words and conversations unhappily impossible to eradicate in\
schools. Boys pure in mind and heart, almost children, are fond of talking\
in school among themselves, and even aloud, of things, pictures, and\
images of which even soldiers would sometimes hesitate to speak. More than\
that, much that soldiers have no knowledge or conception of is familiar to\
quite young children of our intellectual and higher classes. There is no\
moral depravity, no real corrupt inner cynicism in it, but there is the\
appearance of it, and it is often looked upon among them as something\
refined, subtle, daring, and worthy of imitation. Seeing that Alyosha\
Karamazov put his fingers in his ears when they talked of \'93that,\'94 they\
used sometimes to crowd round him, pull his hands away, and shout\
nastiness into both ears, while he struggled, slipped to the floor, tried\
to hide himself without uttering one word of abuse, enduring their insults\
in silence. But at last they left him alone and gave up taunting him with\
being a \'93regular girl,\'94 and what\'92s more they looked upon it with\
compassion as a weakness. He was always one of the best in the class but\
was never first.\
\
At the time of Yefim Petrovitch\'92s death Alyosha had two more years to\
complete at the provincial gymnasium. The inconsolable widow went almost\
immediately after his death for a long visit to Italy with her whole\
family, which consisted only of women and girls. Alyosha went to live in\
the house of two distant relations of Yefim Petrovitch, ladies whom he had\
never seen before. On what terms he lived with them he did not know\
himself. It was very characteristic of him, indeed, that he never cared at\
whose expense he was living. In that respect he was a striking contrast to\
his elder brother Ivan, who struggled with poverty for his first two years\
in the university, maintained himself by his own efforts, and had from\
childhood been bitterly conscious of living at the expense of his\
benefactor. But this strange trait in Alyosha\'92s character must not, I\
think, be criticized too severely, for at the slightest acquaintance with\
him any one would have perceived that Alyosha was one of those youths,\
almost of the type of religious enthusiast, who, if they were suddenly to\
come into possession of a large fortune, would not hesitate to give it\
away for the asking, either for good works or perhaps to a clever rogue.\
In general he seemed scarcely to know the value of money, not, of course,\
in a literal sense. When he was given pocket\uc0\u8208 money, which he never asked\
for, he was either terribly careless of it so that it was gone in a\
moment, or he kept it for weeks together, not knowing what to do with it.\
\
In later years Pyotr Alexandrovitch Mi\'fcsov, a man very sensitive on the\
score of money and bourgeois honesty, pronounced the following judgment,\
after getting to know Alyosha:\
\
\'93Here is perhaps the one man in the world whom you might leave alone\
without a penny, in the center of an unknown town of a million\
inhabitants, and he would not come to harm, he would not die of cold and\
hunger, for he would be fed and sheltered at once; and if he were not, he\
would find a shelter for himself, and it would cost him no effort or\
humiliation. And to shelter him would be no burden, but, on the contrary,\
would probably be looked on as a pleasure.\'94\
\
He did not finish his studies at the gymnasium. A year before the end of\
the course he suddenly announced to the ladies that he was going to see\
his father about a plan which had occurred to him. They were sorry and\
unwilling to let him go. The journey was not an expensive one, and the\
ladies would not let him pawn his watch, a parting present from his\
benefactor\'92s family. They provided him liberally with money and even\
fitted him out with new clothes and linen. But he returned half the money\
they gave him, saying that he intended to go third class. On his arrival\
in the town he made no answer to his father\'92s first inquiry why he had\
come before completing his studies, and seemed, so they say, unusually\
thoughtful. It soon became apparent that he was looking for his mother\'92s\
tomb. He practically acknowledged at the time that that was the only\
object of his visit. But it can hardly have been the whole reason of it.\
It is more probable that he himself did not understand and could not\
explain what had suddenly arisen in his soul, and drawn him irresistibly\
into a new, unknown, but inevitable path. Fyodor Pavlovitch could not show\
him where his second wife was buried, for he had never visited her grave\
since he had thrown earth upon her coffin, and in the course of years had\
entirely forgotten where she was buried.\
\
Fyodor Pavlovitch, by the way, had for some time previously not been\
living in our town. Three or four years after his wife\'92s death he had gone\
to the south of Russia and finally turned up in Odessa, where he spent\
several years. He made the acquaintance at first, in his own words, \'93of a\
lot of low Jews, Jewesses, and Jewkins,\'94 and ended by being received by\
\'93Jews high and low alike.\'94 It may be presumed that at this period he\
developed a peculiar faculty for making and hoarding money. He finally\
returned to our town only three years before Alyosha\'92s arrival. His former\
acquaintances found him looking terribly aged, although he was by no means\
an old man. He behaved not exactly with more dignity but with more\
effrontery. The former buffoon showed an insolent propensity for making\
buffoons of others. His depravity with women was not simply what it used\
to be, but even more revolting. In a short time he opened a great number\
of new taverns in the district. It was evident that he had perhaps a\
hundred thousand roubles or not much less. Many of the inhabitants of the\
town and district were soon in his debt, and, of course, had given good\
security. Of late, too, he looked somehow bloated and seemed more\
irresponsible, more uneven, had sunk into a sort of incoherence, used to\
begin one thing and go on with another, as though he were letting himself\
go altogether. He was more and more frequently drunk. And, if it had not\
been for the same servant Grigory, who by that time had aged considerably\
too, and used to look after him sometimes almost like a tutor, Fyodor\
Pavlovitch might have got into terrible scrapes. Alyosha\'92s arrival seemed\
to affect even his moral side, as though something had awakened in this\
prematurely old man which had long been dead in his soul.\
\
\'93Do you know,\'94 he used often to say, looking at Alyosha, \'93that you are\
like her, \'91the crazy woman\'92 \'94\'97that was what he used to call his dead wife,\
Alyosha\'92s mother. Grigory it was who pointed out the \'93crazy woman\'92s\'94 grave\
to Alyosha. He took him to our town cemetery and showed him in a remote\
corner a cast\uc0\u8208 iron tombstone, cheap but decently kept, on which were\
inscribed the name and age of the deceased and the date of her death, and\
below a four\uc0\u8208 lined verse, such as are commonly used on old\u8208 fashioned\
middle\uc0\u8208 class tombs. To Alyosha\'92s amazement this tomb turned out to be\
Grigory\'92s doing. He had put it up on the poor \'93crazy woman\'92s\'94 grave at his\
own expense, after Fyodor Pavlovitch, whom he had often pestered about the\
grave, had gone to Odessa, abandoning the grave and all his memories.\
Alyosha showed no particular emotion at the sight of his mother\'92s grave.\
He only listened to Grigory\'92s minute and solemn account of the erection of\
the tomb; he stood with bowed head and walked away without uttering a\
word. It was perhaps a year before he visited the cemetery again. But this\
little episode was not without an influence upon Fyodor Pavlovitch\'97and a\
very original one. He suddenly took a thousand roubles to our monastery to\
pay for requiems for the soul of his wife; but not for the second,\
Alyosha\'92s mother, the \'93crazy woman,\'94 but for the first, Adela\'efda Ivanovna,\
who used to thrash him. In the evening of the same day he got drunk and\
abused the monks to Alyosha. He himself was far from being religious; he\
had probably never put a penny candle before the image of a saint. Strange\
impulses of sudden feeling and sudden thought are common in such types.\
\
I have mentioned already that he looked bloated. His countenance at this\
time bore traces of something that testified unmistakably to the life he\
had led. Besides the long fleshy bags under his little, always insolent,\
suspicious, and ironical eyes; besides the multitude of deep wrinkles in\
his little fat face, the Adam\'92s apple hung below his sharp chin like a\
great, fleshy goiter, which gave him a peculiar, repulsive, sensual\
appearance; add to that a long rapacious mouth with full lips, between\
which could be seen little stumps of black decayed teeth. He slobbered\
every time he began to speak. He was fond indeed of making fun of his own\
face, though, I believe, he was well satisfied with it. He used\
particularly to point to his nose, which was not very large, but very\
delicate and conspicuously aquiline. \'93A regular Roman nose,\'94 he used to\
say, \'93with my goiter I\'92ve quite the countenance of an ancient Roman\
patrician of the decadent period.\'94 He seemed proud of it.\
\
Not long after visiting his mother\'92s grave Alyosha suddenly announced that\
he wanted to enter the monastery, and that the monks were willing to\
receive him as a novice. He explained that this was his strong desire, and\
that he was solemnly asking his consent as his father. The old man knew\
that the elder Zossima, who was living in the monastery hermitage, had\
made a special impression upon his \'93gentle boy.\'94\
\
\'93That is the most honest monk among them, of course,\'94 he observed, after\
listening in thoughtful silence to Alyosha, and seeming scarcely surprised\
at his request. \'93H\'92m!... So that\'92s where you want to be, my gentle boy?\'94\
\
He was half drunk, and suddenly he grinned his slow half\uc0\u8208 drunken grin,\
which was not without a certain cunning and tipsy slyness. \'93H\'92m!... I had\
a presentiment that you would end in something like this. Would you\
believe it? You were making straight for it. Well, to be sure you have\
your own two thousand. That\'92s a dowry for you. And I\'92ll never desert you,\
my angel. And I\'92ll pay what\'92s wanted for you there, if they ask for it.\
But, of course, if they don\'92t ask, why should we worry them? What do you\
say? You know, you spend money like a canary, two grains a week. H\'92m!...\
Do you know that near one monastery there\'92s a place outside the town where\
every baby knows there are none but \'91the monks\'92 wives\'92 living, as they are\
called. Thirty women, I believe. I have been there myself. You know, it\'92s\
interesting in its own way, of course, as a variety. The worst of it is\
it\'92s awfully Russian. There are no French women there. Of course they\
could get them fast enough, they have plenty of money. If they get to hear\
of it they\'92ll come along. Well, there\'92s nothing of that sort here, no\
\'91monks\'92 wives,\'92 and two hundred monks. They\'92re honest. They keep the\
fasts. I admit it.... H\'92m.... So you want to be a monk? And do you know\
I\'92m sorry to lose you, Alyosha; would you believe it, I\'92ve really grown\
fond of you? Well, it\'92s a good opportunity. You\'92ll pray for us sinners; we\
have sinned too much here. I\'92ve always been thinking who would pray for\
me, and whether there\'92s any one in the world to do it. My dear boy, I\'92m\
awfully stupid about that. You wouldn\'92t believe it. Awfully. You see,\
however stupid I am about it, I keep thinking, I keep thinking\'97from time\
to time, of course, not all the while. It\'92s impossible, I think, for the\
devils to forget to drag me down to hell with their hooks when I die. Then\
I wonder\'97hooks? Where would they get them? What of? Iron hooks? Where do\
they forge them? Have they a foundry there of some sort? The monks in the\
monastery probably believe that there\'92s a ceiling in hell, for instance.\
Now I\'92m ready to believe in hell, but without a ceiling. It makes it more\
refined, more enlightened, more Lutheran that is. And, after all, what\
does it matter whether it has a ceiling or hasn\'92t? But, do you know,\
there\'92s a damnable question involved in it? If there\'92s no ceiling there\
can be no hooks, and if there are no hooks it all breaks down, which is\
unlikely again, for then there would be none to drag me down to hell, and\
if they don\'92t drag me down what justice is there in the world? _Il\
faudrait les inventer_, those hooks, on purpose for me alone, for, if you\
only knew, Alyosha, what a blackguard I am.\'94\
\
\'93But there are no hooks there,\'94 said Alyosha, looking gently and seriously\
at his father.\
\
\'93Yes, yes, only the shadows of hooks, I know, I know. That\'92s how a\
Frenchman described hell: \'91_J\'92ai bu l\'92ombre d\'92un cocher qui avec l\'92ombre\
d\'92une brosse frottait l\'92ombre d\'92une carrosse._\'92 How do you know there are\
no hooks, darling? When you\'92ve lived with the monks you\'92ll sing a\
different tune. But go and get at the truth there, and then come and tell\
me. Anyway it\'92s easier going to the other world if one knows what there is\
there. Besides, it will be more seemly for you with the monks than here\
with me, with a drunken old man and young harlots ... though you\'92re like\
an angel, nothing touches you. And I dare say nothing will touch you\
there. That\'92s why I let you go, because I hope for that. You\'92ve got all\
your wits about you. You will burn and you will burn out; you will be\
healed and come back again. And I will wait for you. I feel that you\'92re\
the only creature in the world who has not condemned me. My dear boy, I\
feel it, you know. I can\'92t help feeling it.\'94\
\
And he even began blubbering. He was sentimental. He was wicked and\
sentimental.\
\
\
\
Chapter V. Elders\
\
\
Some of my readers may imagine that my young man was a sickly, ecstatic,\
poorly developed creature, a pale, consumptive dreamer. On the contrary,\
Alyosha was at this time a well\uc0\u8208 grown, red\u8208 cheeked, clear\u8208 eyed lad of\
nineteen, radiant with health. He was very handsome, too, graceful,\
moderately tall, with hair of a dark brown, with a regular, rather long,\
oval\uc0\u8208 shaped face, and wide\u8208 set dark gray, shining eyes; he was very\
thoughtful, and apparently very serene. I shall be told, perhaps, that red\
cheeks are not incompatible with fanaticism and mysticism; but I fancy\
that Alyosha was more of a realist than any one. Oh! no doubt, in the\
monastery he fully believed in miracles, but, to my thinking, miracles are\
never a stumbling\uc0\u8208 block to the realist. It is not miracles that dispose\
realists to belief. The genuine realist, if he is an unbeliever, will\
always find strength and ability to disbelieve in the miraculous, and if\
he is confronted with a miracle as an irrefutable fact he would rather\
disbelieve his own senses than admit the fact. Even if he admits it, he\
admits it as a fact of nature till then unrecognized by him. Faith does\
not, in the realist, spring from the miracle but the miracle from faith.\
If the realist once believes, then he is bound by his very realism to\
admit the miraculous also. The Apostle Thomas said that he would not\
believe till he saw, but when he did see he said, \'93My Lord and my God!\'94\
Was it the miracle forced him to believe? Most likely not, but he believed\
solely because he desired to believe and possibly he fully believed in his\
secret heart even when he said, \'93I do not believe till I see.\'94\
\
I shall be told, perhaps, that Alyosha was stupid, undeveloped, had not\
finished his studies, and so on. That he did not finish his studies is\
true, but to say that he was stupid or dull would be a great injustice.\
I\'92ll simply repeat what I have said above. He entered upon this path only\
because, at that time, it alone struck his imagination and presented\
itself to him as offering an ideal means of escape for his soul from\
darkness to light. Add to that that he was to some extent a youth of our\
last epoch\'97that is, honest in nature, desiring the truth, seeking for it\
and believing in it, and seeking to serve it at once with all the strength\
of his soul, seeking for immediate action, and ready to sacrifice\
everything, life itself, for it. Though these young men unhappily fail to\
understand that the sacrifice of life is, in many cases, the easiest of\
all sacrifices, and that to sacrifice, for instance, five or six years of\
their seething youth to hard and tedious study, if only to multiply\
tenfold their powers of serving the truth and the cause they have set\
before them as their goal\'97such a sacrifice is utterly beyond the strength\
of many of them. The path Alyosha chose was a path going in the opposite\
direction, but he chose it with the same thirst for swift achievement. As\
soon as he reflected seriously he was convinced of the existence of God\
and immortality, and at once he instinctively said to himself: \'93I want to\
live for immortality, and I will accept no compromise.\'94 In the same way,\
if he had decided that God and immortality did not exist, he would at once\
have become an atheist and a socialist. For socialism is not merely the\
labor question, it is before all things the atheistic question, the\
question of the form taken by atheism to\uc0\u8208 day, the question of the tower of\
Babel built without God, not to mount to heaven from earth but to set up\
heaven on earth. Alyosha would have found it strange and impossible to go\
on living as before. It is written: \'93Give all that thou hast to the poor\
and follow Me, if thou wouldst be perfect.\'94\
\
Alyosha said to himself: \'93I can\'92t give two roubles instead of \'91all,\'92 and\
only go to mass instead of \'91following Him.\'92 \'94 Perhaps his memories of\
childhood brought back our monastery, to which his mother may have taken\
him to mass. Perhaps the slanting sunlight and the holy image to which his\
poor \'93crazy\'94 mother had held him up still acted upon his imagination.\
Brooding on these things he may have come to us perhaps only to see\
whether here he could sacrifice all or only \'93two roubles,\'94 and in the\
monastery he met this elder. I must digress to explain what an \'93elder\'94 is\
in Russian monasteries, and I am sorry that I do not feel very competent\
to do so. I will try, however, to give a superficial account of it in a\
few words. Authorities on the subject assert that the institution of\
\'93elders\'94 is of recent date, not more than a hundred years old in our\
monasteries, though in the orthodox East, especially in Sinai and Athos,\
it has existed over a thousand years. It is maintained that it existed in\
ancient times in Russia also, but through the calamities which overtook\
Russia\'97the Tartars, civil war, the interruption of relations with the East\
after the destruction of Constantinople\'97this institution fell into\
oblivion. It was revived among us towards the end of last century by one\
of the great \'93ascetics,\'94 as they called him, Pa\'efssy Velitchkovsky, and his\
disciples. But to this day it exists in few monasteries only, and has\
sometimes been almost persecuted as an innovation in Russia. It flourished\
especially in the celebrated Kozelski Optin Monastery. When and how it was\
introduced into our monastery I cannot say. There had already been three\
such elders and Zossima was the last of them. But he was almost dying of\
weakness and disease, and they had no one to take his place. The question\
for our monastery was an important one, for it had not been distinguished\
by anything in particular till then: they had neither relics of saints,\
nor wonder\uc0\u8208 working ikons, nor glorious traditions, nor historical\
exploits. It had flourished and been glorious all over Russia through its\
elders, to see and hear whom pilgrims had flocked for thousands of miles\
from all parts.\
\
What was such an elder? An elder was one who took your soul, your will,\
into his soul and his will. When you choose an elder, you renounce your\
own will and yield it to him in complete submission, complete self\uc0\u8208 \
abnegation. This novitiate, this terrible school of abnegation, is\
undertaken voluntarily, in the hope of self\uc0\u8208 conquest, of self\u8208 mastery, in\
order, after a life of obedience, to attain perfect freedom, that is, from\
self; to escape the lot of those who have lived their whole life without\
finding their true selves in themselves. This institution of elders is not\
founded on theory, but was established in the East from the practice of a\
thousand years. The obligations due to an elder are not the ordinary\
\'93obedience\'94 which has always existed in our Russian monasteries. The\
obligation involves confession to the elder by all who have submitted\
themselves to him, and to the indissoluble bond between him and them.\
\
The story is told, for instance, that in the early days of Christianity\
one such novice, failing to fulfill some command laid upon him by his\
elder, left his monastery in Syria and went to Egypt. There, after great\
exploits, he was found worthy at last to suffer torture and a martyr\'92s\
death for the faith. When the Church, regarding him as a saint, was\
burying him, suddenly, at the deacon\'92s exhortation, \'93Depart all ye\
unbaptized,\'94 the coffin containing the martyr\'92s body left its place and\
was cast forth from the church, and this took place three times. And only\
at last they learnt that this holy man had broken his vow of obedience and\
left his elder, and, therefore, could not be forgiven without the elder\'92s\
absolution in spite of his great deeds. Only after this could the funeral\
take place. This, of course, is only an old legend. But here is a recent\
instance.\
\
A monk was suddenly commanded by his elder to quit Athos, which he loved\
as a sacred place and a haven of refuge, and to go first to Jerusalem to\
do homage to the Holy Places and then to go to the north to Siberia:\
\'93There is the place for thee and not here.\'94 The monk, overwhelmed with\
sorrow, went to the \'8ccumenical Patriarch at Constantinople and besought\
him to release him from his obedience. But the Patriarch replied that not\
only was he unable to release him, but there was not and could not be on\
earth a power which could release him except the elder who had himself\
laid that duty upon him. In this way the elders are endowed in certain\
cases with unbounded and inexplicable authority. That is why in many of\
our monasteries the institution was at first resisted almost to\
persecution. Meantime the elders immediately began to be highly esteemed\
among the people. Masses of the ignorant people as well as men of\
distinction flocked, for instance, to the elders of our monastery to\
confess their doubts, their sins, and their sufferings, and ask for\
counsel and admonition. Seeing this, the opponents of the elders declared\
that the sacrament of confession was being arbitrarily and frivolously\
degraded, though the continual opening of the heart to the elder by the\
monk or the layman had nothing of the character of the sacrament. In the\
end, however, the institution of elders has been retained and is becoming\
established in Russian monasteries. It is true, perhaps, that this\
instrument which had stood the test of a thousand years for the moral\
regeneration of a man from slavery to freedom and to moral perfectibility\
may be a two\uc0\u8208 edged weapon and it may lead some not to humility and\
complete self\uc0\u8208 control but to the most Satanic pride, that is, to bondage\
and not to freedom.\
\
The elder Zossima was sixty\uc0\u8208 five. He came of a family of landowners, had\
been in the army in early youth, and served in the Caucasus as an officer.\
He had, no doubt, impressed Alyosha by some peculiar quality of his soul.\
Alyosha lived in the cell of the elder, who was very fond of him and let\
him wait upon him. It must be noted that Alyosha was bound by no\
obligation and could go where he pleased and be absent for whole days.\
Though he wore the monastic dress it was voluntarily, not to be different\
from others. No doubt he liked to do so. Possibly his youthful imagination\
was deeply stirred by the power and fame of his elder. It was said that so\
many people had for years past come to confess their sins to Father\
Zossima and to entreat him for words of advice and healing, that he had\
acquired the keenest intuition and could tell from an unknown face what a\
new\uc0\u8208 comer wanted, and what was the suffering on his conscience. He\
sometimes astounded and almost alarmed his visitors by his knowledge of\
their secrets before they had spoken a word.\
\
Alyosha noticed that many, almost all, went in to the elder for the first\
time with apprehension and uneasiness, but came out with bright and happy\
faces. Alyosha was particularly struck by the fact that Father Zossima was\
not at all stern. On the contrary, he was always almost gay. The monks\
used to say that he was more drawn to those who were more sinful, and the\
greater the sinner the more he loved him. There were, no doubt, up to the\
end of his life, among the monks some who hated and envied him, but they\
were few in number and they were silent, though among them were some of\
great dignity in the monastery, one, for instance, of the older monks\
distinguished for his strict keeping of fasts and vows of silence. But the\
majority were on Father Zossima\'92s side and very many of them loved him\
with all their hearts, warmly and sincerely. Some were almost fanatically\
devoted to him, and declared, though not quite aloud, that he was a saint,\
that there could be no doubt of it, and, seeing that his end was near,\
they anticipated miracles and great glory to the monastery in the\
immediate future from his relics. Alyosha had unquestioning faith in the\
miraculous power of the elder, just as he had unquestioning faith in the\
story of the coffin that flew out of the church. He saw many who came with\
sick children or relatives and besought the elder to lay hands on them and\
to pray over them, return shortly after\'97some the next day\'97and, falling in\
tears at the elder\'92s feet, thank him for healing their sick.\
\
Whether they had really been healed or were simply better in the natural\
course of the disease was a question which did not exist for Alyosha, for\
he fully believed in the spiritual power of his teacher and rejoiced in\
his fame, in his glory, as though it were his own triumph. His heart\
throbbed, and he beamed, as it were, all over when the elder came out to\
the gates of the hermitage into the waiting crowd of pilgrims of the\
humbler class who had flocked from all parts of Russia on purpose to see\
the elder and obtain his blessing. They fell down before him, wept, kissed\
his feet, kissed the earth on which he stood, and wailed, while the women\
held up their children to him and brought him the sick \'93possessed with\
devils.\'94 The elder spoke to them, read a brief prayer over them, blessed\
them, and dismissed them. Of late he had become so weak through attacks of\
illness that he was sometimes unable to leave his cell, and the pilgrims\
waited for him to come out for several days. Alyosha did not wonder why\
they loved him so, why they fell down before him and wept with emotion\
merely at seeing his face. Oh! he understood that for the humble soul of\
the Russian peasant, worn out by grief and toil, and still more by the\
everlasting injustice and everlasting sin, his own and the world\'92s, it was\
the greatest need and comfort to find some one or something holy to fall\
down before and worship.\
\
\'93Among us there is sin, injustice, and temptation, but yet, somewhere on\
earth there is some one holy and exalted. He has the truth; he knows the\
truth; so it is not dead upon the earth; so it will come one day to us,\
too, and rule over all the earth according to the promise.\'94\
\
Alyosha knew that this was just how the people felt and even reasoned. He\
understood it, but that the elder Zossima was this saint and custodian of\
God\'92s truth\'97of that he had no more doubt than the weeping peasants and the\
sick women who held out their children to the elder. The conviction that\
after his death the elder would bring extraordinary glory to the monastery\
was even stronger in Alyosha than in any one there, and, of late, a kind\
of deep flame of inner ecstasy burnt more and more strongly in his heart.\
He was not at all troubled at this elder\'92s standing as a solitary example\
before him.\
\
\'93No matter. He is holy. He carries in his heart the secret of renewal for\
all: that power which will, at last, establish truth on the earth, and all\
men will be holy and love one another, and there will be no more rich nor\
poor, no exalted nor humbled, but all will be as the children of God, and\
the true Kingdom of Christ will come.\'94 That was the dream in Alyosha\'92s\
heart.\
\
The arrival of his two brothers, whom he had not known till then, seemed\
to make a great impression on Alyosha. He more quickly made friends with\
his half\uc0\u8208 brother Dmitri (though he arrived later) than with his own\
brother Ivan. He was extremely interested in his brother Ivan, but when\
the latter had been two months in the town, though they had met fairly\
often, they were still not intimate. Alyosha was naturally silent, and he\
seemed to be expecting something, ashamed about something, while his\
brother Ivan, though Alyosha noticed at first that he looked long and\
curiously at him, seemed soon to have left off thinking of him. Alyosha\
noticed it with some embarrassment. He ascribed his brother\'92s indifference\
at first to the disparity of their age and education. But he also wondered\
whether the absence of curiosity and sympathy in Ivan might be due to some\
other cause entirely unknown to him. He kept fancying that Ivan was\
absorbed in something\'97something inward and important\'97that he was striving\
towards some goal, perhaps very hard to attain, and that that was why he\
had no thought for him. Alyosha wondered, too, whether there was not some\
contempt on the part of the learned atheist for him\'97a foolish novice. He\
knew for certain that his brother was an atheist. He could not take\
offense at this contempt, if it existed; yet, with an uneasy embarrassment\
which he did not himself understand, he waited for his brother to come\
nearer to him. Dmitri used to speak of Ivan with the deepest respect and\
with a peculiar earnestness. From him Alyosha learnt all the details of\
the important affair which had of late formed such a close and remarkable\
bond between the two elder brothers. Dmitri\'92s enthusiastic references to\
Ivan were the more striking in Alyosha\'92s eyes since Dmitri was, compared\
with Ivan, almost uneducated, and the two brothers were such a contrast in\
personality and character that it would be difficult to find two men more\
unlike.\
\
It was at this time that the meeting, or, rather gathering of the members\
of this inharmonious family took place in the cell of the elder who had\
such an extraordinary influence on Alyosha. The pretext for this gathering\
was a false one. It was at this time that the discord between Dmitri and\
his father seemed at its acutest stage and their relations had become\
insufferably strained. Fyodor Pavlovitch seems to have been the first to\
suggest, apparently in joke, that they should all meet in Father Zossima\'92s\
cell, and that, without appealing to his direct intervention, they might\
more decently come to an understanding under the conciliating influence of\
the elder\'92s presence. Dmitri, who had never seen the elder, naturally\
supposed that his father was trying to intimidate him, but, as he secretly\
blamed himself for his outbursts of temper with his father on several\
recent occasions, he accepted the challenge. It must be noted that he was\
not, like Ivan, staying with his father, but living apart at the other end\
of the town. It happened that Pyotr Alexandrovitch Mi\'fcsov, who was staying\
in the district at the time, caught eagerly at the idea. A Liberal of the\
forties and fifties, a freethinker and atheist, he may have been led on by\
boredom or the hope of frivolous diversion. He was suddenly seized with\
the desire to see the monastery and the holy man. As his lawsuit with the\
monastery still dragged on, he made it the pretext for seeing the\
Superior, in order to attempt to settle it amicably. A visitor coming with\
such laudable intentions might be received with more attention and\
consideration than if he came from simple curiosity. Influences from\
within the monastery were brought to bear on the elder, who of late had\
scarcely left his cell, and had been forced by illness to deny even his\
ordinary visitors. In the end he consented to see them, and the day was\
fixed.\
\
\'93Who has made me a judge over them?\'94 was all he said, smilingly, to\
Alyosha.\
\
Alyosha was much perturbed when he heard of the proposed visit. Of all the\
wrangling, quarrelsome party, Dmitri was the only one who could regard the\
interview seriously. All the others would come from frivolous motives,\
perhaps insulting to the elder. Alyosha was well aware of that. Ivan and\
Mi\'fcsov would come from curiosity, perhaps of the coarsest kind, while his\
father might be contemplating some piece of buffoonery. Though he said\
nothing, Alyosha thoroughly understood his father. The boy, I repeat, was\
far from being so simple as every one thought him. He awaited the day with\
a heavy heart. No doubt he was always pondering in his mind how the family\
discord could be ended. But his chief anxiety concerned the elder. He\
trembled for him, for his glory, and dreaded any affront to him,\
especially the refined, courteous irony of Mi\'fcsov and the supercilious\
half\uc0\u8208 utterances of the highly educated Ivan. He even wanted to venture on\
warning the elder, telling him something about them, but, on second\
thoughts, said nothing. He only sent word the day before, through a\
friend, to his brother Dmitri, that he loved him and expected him to keep\
his promise. Dmitri wondered, for he could not remember what he had\
promised, but he answered by letter that he would do his utmost not to let\
himself be provoked \'93by vileness,\'94 but that, although he had a deep\
respect for the elder and for his brother Ivan, he was convinced that the\
meeting was either a trap for him or an unworthy farce.\
\
\'93Nevertheless I would rather bite out my tongue than be lacking in respect\
to the sainted man whom you reverence so highly,\'94 he wrote in conclusion.\
Alyosha was not greatly cheered by the letter.\
\
\
\
\
Book II. An Unfortunate Gathering\
\
\
\
Chapter I. They Arrive At The Monastery\
\
\
It was a warm, bright day at the end of August. The interview with the\
elder had been fixed for half\uc0\u8208 past eleven, immediately after late mass.\
Our visitors did not take part in the service, but arrived just as it was\
over. First an elegant open carriage, drawn by two valuable horses, drove\
up with Mi\'fcsov and a distant relative of his, a young man of twenty,\
called Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov. This young man was preparing to enter the\
university. Mi\'fcsov, with whom he was staying for the time, was trying to\
persuade him to go abroad to the university of Zurich or Jena. The young\
man was still undecided. He was thoughtful and absent\uc0\u8208 minded. He was nice\u8208 \
looking, strongly built, and rather tall. There was a strange fixity in\
his gaze at times. Like all very absent\uc0\u8208 minded people he would sometimes\
stare at a person without seeing him. He was silent and rather awkward,\
but sometimes, when he was alone with any one, he became talkative and\
effusive, and would laugh at anything or nothing. But his animation\
vanished as quickly as it appeared. He was always well and even\
elaborately dressed; he had already some independent fortune and\
expectations of much more. He was a friend of Alyosha\'92s.\
\
In an ancient, jolting, but roomy, hired carriage, with a pair of old\
pinkish\uc0\u8208 gray horses, a long way behind Mi\'fcsov\'92s carriage, came Fyodor\
Pavlovitch, with his son Ivan. Dmitri was late, though he had been\
informed of the time the evening before. The visitors left their carriage\
at the hotel, outside the precincts, and went to the gates of the\
monastery on foot. Except Fyodor Pavlovitch, none of the party had ever\
seen the monastery, and Mi\'fcsov had probably not even been to church for\
thirty years. He looked about him with curiosity, together with assumed\
ease. But, except the church and the domestic buildings, though these too\
were ordinary enough, he found nothing of interest in the interior of the\
monastery. The last of the worshippers were coming out of the church,\
bareheaded and crossing themselves. Among the humbler people were a few of\
higher rank\'97two or three ladies and a very old general. They were all\
staying at the hotel. Our visitors were at once surrounded by beggars, but\
none of them gave them anything, except young Kalganov, who took a ten\uc0\u8208 \
copeck piece out of his purse, and, nervous and embarrassed\'97God knows\
why!\'97hurriedly gave it to an old woman, saying: \'93Divide it equally.\'94 None\
of his companions made any remark upon it, so that he had no reason to be\
embarrassed; but, perceiving this, he was even more overcome.\
\
It was strange that their arrival did not seem expected, and that they\
were not received with special honor, though one of them had recently made\
a donation of a thousand roubles, while another was a very wealthy and\
highly cultured landowner, upon whom all in the monastery were in a sense\
dependent, as a decision of the lawsuit might at any moment put their\
fishing rights in his hands. Yet no official personage met them.\
\
Mi\'fcsov looked absent\uc0\u8208 mindedly at the tombstones round the church, and was\
on the point of saying that the dead buried here must have paid a pretty\
penny for the right of lying in this \'93holy place,\'94 but refrained. His\
liberal irony was rapidly changing almost into anger.\
\
\'93Who the devil is there to ask in this imbecile place? We must find out,\
for time is passing,\'94 he observed suddenly, as though speaking to himself.\
\
All at once there came up a bald\uc0\u8208 headed, elderly man with ingratiating\
little eyes, wearing a full, summer overcoat. Lifting his hat, he\
introduced himself with a honeyed lisp as Maximov, a landowner of Tula. He\
at once entered into our visitors\'92 difficulty.\
\
\'93Father Zossima lives in the hermitage, apart, four hundred paces from the\
monastery, the other side of the copse.\'94\
\
\'93I know it\'92s the other side of the copse,\'94 observed Fyodor Pavlovitch,\
\'93but we don\'92t remember the way. It is a long time since we\'92ve been here.\'94\
\
\'93This way, by this gate, and straight across the copse ... the copse. Come\
with me, won\'92t you? I\'92ll show you. I have to go.... I am going myself.\
This way, this way.\'94\
\
They came out of the gate and turned towards the copse. Maximov, a man of\
sixty, ran rather than walked, turning sideways to stare at them all, with\
an incredible degree of nervous curiosity. His eyes looked starting out of\
his head.\
\
\'93You see, we have come to the elder upon business of our own,\'94 observed\
Mi\'fcsov severely. \'93That personage has granted us an audience, so to speak,\
and so, though we thank you for showing us the way, we cannot ask you to\
accompany us.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve been there. I\'92ve been already; _un chevalier parfait_,\'94 and Maximov\
snapped his fingers in the air.\
\
\'93Who is a _chevalier_?\'94 asked Mi\'fcsov.\
\
\'93The elder, the splendid elder, the elder! The honor and glory of the\
monastery, Zossima. Such an elder!\'94\
\
But his incoherent talk was cut short by a very pale, wan\uc0\u8208 looking monk of\
medium height, wearing a monk\'92s cap, who overtook them. Fyodor Pavlovitch\
and Mi\'fcsov stopped.\
\
The monk, with an extremely courteous, profound bow, announced:\
\
\'93The Father Superior invites all of you gentlemen to dine with him after\
your visit to the hermitage. At one o\'92clock, not later. And you also,\'94 he\
added, addressing Maximov.\
\
\'93That I certainly will, without fail,\'94 cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, hugely\
delighted at the invitation. \'93And, believe me, we\'92ve all given our word to\
behave properly here.... And you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, will you go, too?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, of course. What have I come for but to study all the customs here?\
The only obstacle to me is your company....\'94\
\
\'93Yes, Dmitri Fyodorovitch is non\uc0\u8208 existent as yet.\'94\
\
\'93It would be a capital thing if he didn\'92t turn up. Do you suppose I like\
all this business, and in your company, too? So we will come to dinner.\
Thank the Father Superior,\'94 he said to the monk.\
\
\'93No, it is my duty now to conduct you to the elder,\'94 answered the monk.\
\
\'93If so I\'92ll go straight to the Father Superior\'97to the Father Superior,\'94\
babbled Maximov.\
\
\'93The Father Superior is engaged just now. But as you please\'97\'94 the monk\
hesitated.\
\
\'93Impertinent old man!\'94 Mi\'fcsov observed aloud, while Maximov ran back to\
the monastery.\
\
\'93He\'92s like von Sohn,\'94 Fyodor Pavlovitch said suddenly.\
\
\'93Is that all you can think of?... In what way is he like von Sohn? Have\
you ever seen von Sohn?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve seen his portrait. It\'92s not the features, but something indefinable.\
He\'92s a second von Sohn. I can always tell from the physiognomy.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, I dare say you are a connoisseur in that. But, look here, Fyodor\
Pavlovitch, you said just now that we had given our word to behave\
properly. Remember it. I advise you to control yourself. But, if you begin\
to play the fool I don\'92t intend to be associated with you here.... You see\
what a man he is\'94\'97he turned to the monk\'97\'93I\'92m afraid to go among decent\
people with him.\'94 A fine smile, not without a certain slyness, came on to\
the pale, bloodless lips of the monk, but he made no reply, and was\
evidently silent from a sense of his own dignity. Mi\'fcsov frowned more than\
ever.\
\
\'93Oh, devil take them all! An outer show elaborated through centuries, and\
nothing but charlatanism and nonsense underneath,\'94 flashed through\
Mi\'fcsov\'92s mind.\
\
\'93Here\'92s the hermitage. We\'92ve arrived,\'94 cried Fyodor Pavlovitch. \'93The gates\
are shut.\'94\
\
And he repeatedly made the sign of the cross to the saints painted above\
and on the sides of the gates.\
\
\'93When you go to Rome you must do as the Romans do. Here in this hermitage\
there are twenty\uc0\u8208 five saints being saved. They look at one another, and\
eat cabbages. And not one woman goes in at this gate. That\'92s what is\
remarkable. And that really is so. But I did hear that the elder receives\
ladies,\'94 he remarked suddenly to the monk.\
\
\'93Women of the people are here too now, lying in the portico there waiting.\
But for ladies of higher rank two rooms have been built adjoining the\
portico, but outside the precincts\'97you can see the windows\'97and the elder\
goes out to them by an inner passage when he is well enough. They are\
always outside the precincts. There is a Harkov lady, Madame Hohlakov,\
waiting there now with her sick daughter. Probably he has promised to come\
out to her, though of late he has been so weak that he has hardly shown\
himself even to the people.\'94\
\
\'93So then there are loopholes, after all, to creep out of the hermitage to\
the ladies. Don\'92t suppose, holy father, that I mean any harm. But do you\
know that at Athos not only the visits of women are not allowed, but no\
creature of the female sex\'97no hens, nor turkey\uc0\u8208 hens, nor cows.\'94\
\
\'93Fyodor Pavlovitch, I warn you I shall go back and leave you here. They\'92ll\
turn you out when I\'92m gone.\'94\
\
\'93But I\'92m not interfering with you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch. Look,\'94 he cried\
suddenly, stepping within the precincts, \'93what a vale of roses they live\
in!\'94\
\
Though there were no roses now, there were numbers of rare and beautiful\
autumn flowers growing wherever there was space for them, and evidently\
tended by a skillful hand; there were flower\uc0\u8208 beds round the church, and\
between the tombs; and the one\uc0\u8208 storied wooden house where the elder lived\
was also surrounded with flowers.\
\
\'93And was it like this in the time of the last elder, Varsonofy? He didn\'92t\
care for such elegance. They say he used to jump up and thrash even ladies\
with a stick,\'94 observed Fyodor Pavlovitch, as he went up the steps.\
\
\'93The elder Varsonofy did sometimes seem rather strange, but a great deal\
that\'92s told is foolishness. He never thrashed any one,\'94 answered the monk.\
\'93Now, gentlemen, if you will wait a minute I will announce you.\'94\
\
\'93Fyodor Pavlovitch, for the last time, your compact, do you hear? Behave\
properly or I will pay you out!\'94 Mi\'fcsov had time to mutter again.\
\
\'93I can\'92t think why you are so agitated,\'94 Fyodor Pavlovitch observed\
sarcastically. \'93Are you uneasy about your sins? They say he can tell by\
one\'92s eyes what one has come about. And what a lot you think of their\
opinion! you, a Parisian, and so advanced. I\'92m surprised at you.\'94\
\
But Mi\'fcsov had no time to reply to this sarcasm. They were asked to come\
in. He walked in, somewhat irritated.\
\
\'93Now, I know myself, I am annoyed, I shall lose my temper and begin to\
quarrel\'97and lower myself and my ideas,\'94 he reflected.\
\
\
\
Chapter II. The Old Buffoon\
\
\
They entered the room almost at the same moment that the elder came in\
from his bedroom. There were already in the cell, awaiting the elder, two\
monks of the hermitage, one the Father Librarian, and the other Father\
Pa\'efssy, a very learned man, so they said, in delicate health, though not\
old. There was also a tall young man, who looked about two and twenty,\
standing in the corner throughout the interview. He had a broad, fresh\
face, and clever, observant, narrow brown eyes, and was wearing ordinary\
dress. He was a divinity student, living under the protection of the\
monastery. His expression was one of unquestioning, but self\uc0\u8208 respecting,\
reverence. Being in a subordinate and dependent position, and so not on an\
equality with the guests, he did not greet them with a bow.\
\
Father Zossima was accompanied by a novice, and by Alyosha. The two monks\
rose and greeted him with a very deep bow, touching the ground with their\
fingers; then kissed his hand. Blessing them, the elder replied with as\
deep a reverence to them, and asked their blessing. The whole ceremony was\
performed very seriously and with an appearance of feeling, not like an\
everyday rite. But Mi\'fcsov fancied that it was all done with intentional\
impressiveness. He stood in front of the other visitors. He ought\'97he had\
reflected upon it the evening before\'97from simple politeness, since it was\
the custom here, to have gone up to receive the elder\'92s blessing, even if\
he did not kiss his hand. But when he saw all this bowing and kissing on\
the part of the monks he instantly changed his mind. With dignified\
gravity he made a rather deep, conventional bow, and moved away to a\
chair. Fyodor Pavlovitch did the same, mimicking Mi\'fcsov like an ape. Ivan\
bowed with great dignity and courtesy, but he too kept his hands at his\
sides, while Kalganov was so confused that he did not bow at all. The\
elder let fall the hand raised to bless them, and bowing to them again,\
asked them all to sit down. The blood rushed to Alyosha\'92s cheeks. He was\
ashamed. His forebodings were coming true.\
\
Father Zossima sat down on a very old\uc0\u8208 fashioned mahogany sofa, covered\
with leather, and made his visitors sit down in a row along the opposite\
wall on four mahogany chairs, covered with shabby black leather. The monks\
sat, one at the door and the other at the window. The divinity student,\
the novice, and Alyosha remained standing. The cell was not very large and\
had a faded look. It contained nothing but the most necessary furniture,\
of coarse and poor quality. There were two pots of flowers in the window,\
and a number of holy pictures in the corner. Before one huge ancient ikon\
of the Virgin a lamp was burning. Near it were two other holy pictures in\
shining settings, and, next them, carved cherubims, china eggs, a Catholic\
cross of ivory, with a Mater Dolorosa embracing it, and several foreign\
engravings from the great Italian artists of past centuries. Next to these\
costly and artistic engravings were several of the roughest Russian prints\
of saints and martyrs, such as are sold for a few farthings at all the\
fairs. On the other walls were portraits of Russian bishops, past and\
present.\
\
Mi\'fcsov took a cursory glance at all these \'93conventional\'94 surroundings and\
bent an intent look upon the elder. He had a high opinion of his own\
insight, a weakness excusable in him as he was fifty, an age at which a\
clever man of the world of established position can hardly help taking\
himself rather seriously. At the first moment he did not like Zossima.\
There was, indeed, something in the elder\'92s face which many people besides\
Mi\'fcsov might not have liked. He was a short, bent, little man, with very\
weak legs, and though he was only sixty\uc0\u8208 five, he looked at least ten years\
older. His face was very thin and covered with a network of fine wrinkles,\
particularly numerous about his eyes, which were small, light\uc0\u8208 colored,\
quick, and shining like two bright points. He had a sprinkling of gray\
hair about his temples. His pointed beard was small and scanty, and his\
lips, which smiled frequently, were as thin as two threads. His nose was\
not long, but sharp, like a bird\'92s beak.\
\
\'93To all appearances a malicious soul, full of petty pride,\'94 thought\
Mi\'fcsov. He felt altogether dissatisfied with his position.\
\
A cheap little clock on the wall struck twelve hurriedly, and served to\
begin the conversation.\
\
\'93Precisely to our time,\'94 cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, \'93but no sign of my son,\
Dmitri. I apologize for him, sacred elder!\'94 (Alyosha shuddered all over at\
\'93sacred elder.\'94) \'93I am always punctual myself, minute for minute,\
remembering that punctuality is the courtesy of kings....\'94\
\
\'93But you are not a king, anyway,\'94 Mi\'fcsov muttered, losing his self\uc0\u8208 \
restraint at once.\
\
\'93Yes; that\'92s true. I\'92m not a king, and, would you believe it, Pyotr\
Alexandrovitch, I was aware of that myself. But, there! I always say the\
wrong thing. Your reverence,\'94 he cried, with sudden pathos, \'93you behold\
before you a buffoon in earnest! I introduce myself as such. It\'92s an old\
habit, alas! And if I sometimes talk nonsense out of place it\'92s with an\
object, with the object of amusing people and making myself agreeable. One\
must be agreeable, mustn\'92t one? I was seven years ago in a little town\
where I had business, and I made friends with some merchants there. We\
went to the captain of police because we had to see him about something,\
and to ask him to dine with us. He was a tall, fat, fair, sulky man, the\
most dangerous type in such cases. It\'92s their liver. I went straight up to\
him, and with the ease of a man of the world, you know, \'91Mr. Ispravnik,\'92\
said I, \'91be our Napravnik.\'92 \'91What do you mean by Napravnik?\'92 said he. I\
saw, at the first half\uc0\u8208 second, that it had missed fire. He stood there so\
glum. \'91I wanted to make a joke,\'92 said I, \'91for the general diversion, as\
Mr. Napravnik is our well\uc0\u8208 known Russian orchestra conductor and what we\
need for the harmony of our undertaking is some one of that sort.\'92 And I\
explained my comparison very reasonably, didn\'92t I? \'91Excuse me,\'92 said he,\
\'91I am an Ispravnik, and I do not allow puns to be made on my calling.\'92 He\
turned and walked away. I followed him, shouting, \'91Yes, yes, you are an\
Ispravnik, not a Napravnik.\'92 \'91No,\'92 he said, \'91since you called me a\
Napravnik I am one.\'92 And would you believe it, it ruined our business! And\
I\'92m always like that, always like that. Always injuring myself with my\
politeness. Once, many years ago, I said to an influential person: \'91Your\
wife is a ticklish lady,\'92 in an honorable sense, of the moral qualities,\
so to speak. But he asked me, \'91Why, have you tickled her?\'92 I thought I\'92d\
be polite, so I couldn\'92t help saying, \'91Yes,\'92 and he gave me a fine\
tickling on the spot. Only that happened long ago, so I\'92m not ashamed to\
tell the story. I\'92m always injuring myself like that.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92re doing it now,\'94 muttered Mi\'fcsov, with disgust.\
\
Father Zossima scrutinized them both in silence.\
\
\'93Am I? Would you believe it, I was aware of that, too, Pyotr\
Alexandrovitch, and let me tell you, indeed, I foresaw I should as soon as\
I began to speak. And do you know I foresaw, too, that you\'92d be the first\
to remark on it. The minute I see my joke isn\'92t coming off, your\
reverence, both my cheeks feel as though they were drawn down to the lower\
jaw and there is almost a spasm in them. That\'92s been so since I was young,\
when I had to make jokes for my living in noblemen\'92s families. I am an\
inveterate buffoon, and have been from birth up, your reverence, it\'92s as\
though it were a craze in me. I dare say it\'92s a devil within me. But only\
a little one. A more serious one would have chosen another lodging. But\
not your soul, Pyotr Alexandrovitch; you\'92re not a lodging worth having\
either. But I do believe\'97I believe in God, though I have had doubts of\
late. But now I sit and await words of wisdom. I\'92m like the philosopher,\
Diderot, your reverence. Did you ever hear, most Holy Father, how Diderot\
went to see the Metropolitan Platon, in the time of the Empress Catherine?\
He went in and said straight out, \'91There is no God.\'92 To which the great\
bishop lifted up his finger and answered, \'91The fool hath said in his heart\
there is no God.\'92 And he fell down at his feet on the spot. \'91I believe,\'92\
he cried, \'91and will be christened.\'92 And so he was. Princess Dashkov was\
his godmother, and Potyomkin his godfather.\'94\
\
\'93Fyodor Pavlovitch, this is unbearable! You know you\'92re telling lies and\
that that stupid anecdote isn\'92t true. Why are you playing the fool?\'94 cried\
Mi\'fcsov in a shaking voice.\
\
\'93I suspected all my life that it wasn\'92t true,\'94 Fyodor Pavlovitch cried\
with conviction. \'93But I\'92ll tell you the whole truth, gentlemen. Great\
elder! Forgive me, the last thing about Diderot\'92s christening I made up\
just now. I never thought of it before. I made it up to add piquancy. I\
play the fool, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, to make myself agreeable. Though I\
really don\'92t know myself, sometimes, what I do it for. And as for Diderot,\
I heard as far as \'91the fool hath said in his heart\'92 twenty times from the\
gentry about here when I was young. I heard your aunt, Pyotr\
Alexandrovitch, tell the story. They all believe to this day that the\
infidel Diderot came to dispute about God with the Metropolitan\
Platon....\'94\
\
Mi\'fcsov got up, forgetting himself in his impatience. He was furious, and\
conscious of being ridiculous.\
\
What was taking place in the cell was really incredible. For forty or\
fifty years past, from the times of former elders, no visitors had entered\
that cell without feelings of the profoundest veneration. Almost every one\
admitted to the cell felt that a great favor was being shown him. Many\
remained kneeling during the whole visit. Of those visitors, many had been\
men of high rank and learning, some even freethinkers, attracted by\
curiosity, but all without exception had shown the profoundest reverence\
and delicacy, for here there was no question of money, but only, on the\
one side love and kindness, and on the other penitence and eager desire to\
decide some spiritual problem or crisis. So that such buffoonery amazed\
and bewildered the spectators, or at least some of them. The monks, with\
unchanged countenances, waited, with earnest attention, to hear what the\
elder would say, but seemed on the point of standing up, like Mi\'fcsov.\
Alyosha stood, with hanging head, on the verge of tears. What seemed to\
him strangest of all was that his brother Ivan, on whom alone he had\
rested his hopes, and who alone had such influence on his father that he\
could have stopped him, sat now quite unmoved, with downcast eyes,\
apparently waiting with interest to see how it would end, as though he had\
nothing to do with it. Alyosha did not dare to look at Rakitin, the\
divinity student, whom he knew almost intimately. He alone in the\
monastery knew Rakitin\'92s thoughts.\
\
\'93Forgive me,\'94 began Mi\'fcsov, addressing Father Zossima, \'93for perhaps I seem\
to be taking part in this shameful foolery. I made a mistake in believing\
that even a man like Fyodor Pavlovitch would understand what was due on a\
visit to so honored a personage. I did not suppose I should have to\
apologize simply for having come with him....\'94\
\
Pyotr Alexandrovitch could say no more, and was about to leave the room,\
overwhelmed with confusion.\
\
\'93Don\'92t distress yourself, I beg.\'94 The elder got on to his feeble legs, and\
taking Pyotr Alexandrovitch by both hands, made him sit down again. \'93I beg\
you not to disturb yourself. I particularly beg you to be my guest.\'94 And\
with a bow he went back and sat down again on his little sofa.\
\
\'93Great elder, speak! Do I annoy you by my vivacity?\'94 Fyodor Pavlovitch\
cried suddenly, clutching the arms of his chair in both hands, as though\
ready to leap up from it if the answer were unfavorable.\
\
\'93I earnestly beg you, too, not to disturb yourself, and not to be uneasy,\'94\
the elder said impressively. \'93Do not trouble. Make yourself quite at home.\
And, above all, do not be so ashamed of yourself, for that is at the root\
of it all.\'94\
\
\'93Quite at home? To be my natural self? Oh, that is much too much, but I\
accept it with grateful joy. Do you know, blessed Father, you\'92d better not\
invite me to be my natural self. Don\'92t risk it.... I will not go so far as\
that myself. I warn you for your own sake. Well, the rest is still plunged\
in the mists of uncertainty, though there are people who\'92d be pleased to\
describe me for you. I mean that for you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch. But as for\
you, holy being, let me tell you, I am brimming over with ecstasy.\'94\
\
He got up, and throwing up his hands, declaimed, \'93Blessed be the womb that\
bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck\'97the paps especially. When you\
said just now, \'91Don\'92t be so ashamed of yourself, for that is at the root\
of it all,\'92 you pierced right through me by that remark, and read me to\
the core. Indeed, I always feel when I meet people that I am lower than\
all, and that they all take me for a buffoon. So I say, \'91Let me really\
play the buffoon. I am not afraid of your opinion, for you are every one\
of you worse than I am.\'92 That is why I am a buffoon. It is from shame,\
great elder, from shame; it\'92s simply over\uc0\u8208 sensitiveness that makes me\
rowdy. If I had only been sure that every one would accept me as the\
kindest and wisest of men, oh, Lord, what a good man I should have been\
then! Teacher!\'94 he fell suddenly on his knees, \'93what must I do to gain\
eternal life?\'94\
\
It was difficult even now to decide whether he was joking or really moved.\
\
Father Zossima, lifting his eyes, looked at him, and said with a smile:\
\
\'93You have known for a long time what you must do. You have sense enough:\
don\'92t give way to drunkenness and incontinence of speech; don\'92t give way\
to sensual lust; and, above all, to the love of money. And close your\
taverns. If you can\'92t close all, at least two or three. And, above\
all\'97don\'92t lie.\'94\
\
\'93You mean about Diderot?\'94\
\
\'93No, not about Diderot. Above all, don\'92t lie to yourself. The man who lies\
to himself and listens to his own lie comes to such a pass that he cannot\
distinguish the truth within him, or around him, and so loses all respect\
for himself and for others. And having no respect he ceases to love, and\
in order to occupy and distract himself without love he gives way to\
passions and coarse pleasures, and sinks to bestiality in his vices, all\
from continual lying to other men and to himself. The man who lies to\
himself can be more easily offended than any one. You know it is sometimes\
very pleasant to take offense, isn\'92t it? A man may know that nobody has\
insulted him, but that he has invented the insult for himself, has lied\
and exaggerated to make it picturesque, has caught at a word and made a\
mountain out of a molehill\'97he knows that himself, yet he will be the first\
to take offense, and will revel in his resentment till he feels great\
pleasure in it, and so pass to genuine vindictiveness. But get up, sit\
down, I beg you. All this, too, is deceitful posturing....\'94\
\
\'93Blessed man! Give me your hand to kiss.\'94\
\
Fyodor Pavlovitch skipped up, and imprinted a rapid kiss on the elder\'92s\
thin hand. \'93It is, it is pleasant to take offense. You said that so well,\
as I never heard it before. Yes, I have been all my life taking offense,\
to please myself, taking offense on esthetic grounds, for it is not so\
much pleasant as distinguished sometimes to be insulted\'97that you had\
forgotten, great elder, it is distinguished! I shall make a note of that.\
But I have been lying, lying positively my whole life long, every day and\
hour of it. Of a truth, I am a lie, and the father of lies. Though I\
believe I am not the father of lies. I am getting mixed in my texts. Say,\
the son of lies, and that will be enough. Only ... my angel ... I may\
sometimes talk about Diderot! Diderot will do no harm, though sometimes a\
word will do harm. Great elder, by the way, I was forgetting, though I had\
been meaning for the last two years to come here on purpose to ask and to\
find out something. Only do tell Pyotr Alexandrovitch not to interrupt me.\
Here is my question: Is it true, great Father, that the story is told\
somewhere in the _Lives of the Saints_ of a holy saint martyred for his\
faith who, when his head was cut off at last, stood up, picked up his\
head, and, \'91courteously kissing it,\'92 walked a long way, carrying it in his\
hands. Is that true or not, honored Father?\'94\
\
\'93No, it is untrue,\'94 said the elder.\
\
\'93There is nothing of the kind in all the lives of the saints. What saint\
do you say the story is told of?\'94 asked the Father Librarian.\
\
\'93I do not know what saint. I do not know, and can\'92t tell. I was deceived.\
I was told the story. I had heard it, and do you know who told it? Pyotr\
Alexandrovitch Mi\'fcsov here, who was so angry just now about Diderot. He it\
was who told the story.\'94\
\
\'93I have never told it you, I never speak to you at all.\'94\
\
\'93It is true you did not tell me, but you told it when I was present. It\
was three years ago. I mentioned it because by that ridiculous story you\
shook my faith, Pyotr Alexandrovitch. You knew nothing of it, but I went\
home with my faith shaken, and I have been getting more and more shaken\
ever since. Yes, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, you were the cause of a great fall.\
That was not a Diderot!\'94\
\
Fyodor Pavlovitch got excited and pathetic, though it was perfectly clear\
to every one by now that he was playing a part again. Yet Mi\'fcsov was stung\
by his words.\
\
\'93What nonsense, and it is all nonsense,\'94 he muttered. \'93I may really have\
told it, some time or other ... but not to you. I was told it myself. I\
heard it in Paris from a Frenchman. He told me it was read at our mass\
from the _Lives of the Saints_ ... he was a very learned man who had made\
a special study of Russian statistics and had lived a long time in\
Russia.... I have not read the _Lives of the Saints_ myself, and I am not\
going to read them ... all sorts of things are said at dinner\'97we were\
dining then.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, you were dining then, and so I lost my faith!\'94 said Fyodor\
Pavlovitch, mimicking him.\
\
\'93What do I care for your faith?\'94 Mi\'fcsov was on the point of shouting, but\
he suddenly checked himself, and said with contempt, \'93You defile\
everything you touch.\'94\
\
The elder suddenly rose from his seat. \'93Excuse me, gentlemen, for leaving\
you a few minutes,\'94 he said, addressing all his guests. \'93I have visitors\
awaiting me who arrived before you. But don\'92t you tell lies all the same,\'94\
he added, turning to Fyodor Pavlovitch with a good\uc0\u8208 humored face. He went\
out of the cell. Alyosha and the novice flew to escort him down the steps.\
Alyosha was breathless: he was glad to get away, but he was glad, too,\
that the elder was good\uc0\u8208 humored and not offended. Father Zossima was going\
towards the portico to bless the people waiting for him there. But Fyodor\
Pavlovitch persisted in stopping him at the door of the cell.\
\
\'93Blessed man!\'94 he cried, with feeling. \'93Allow me to kiss your hand once\
more. Yes, with you I could still talk, I could still get on. Do you think\
I always lie and play the fool like this? Believe me, I have been acting\
like this all the time on purpose to try you. I have been testing you all\
the time to see whether I could get on with you. Is there room for my\
humility beside your pride? I am ready to give you a testimonial that one\
can get on with you! But now, I\'92ll be quiet; I will keep quiet all the\
time. I\'92ll sit in a chair and hold my tongue. Now it is for you to speak,\
Pyotr Alexandrovitch. You are the principal person left now\'97for ten\
minutes.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter III. Peasant Women Who Have Faith\
\
\
Near the wooden portico below, built on to the outer wall of the precinct,\
there was a crowd of about twenty peasant women. They had been told that\
the elder was at last coming out, and they had gathered together in\
anticipation. Two ladies, Madame Hohlakov and her daughter, had also come\
out into the portico to wait for the elder, but in a separate part of it\
set aside for women of rank.\
\
Madame Hohlakov was a wealthy lady, still young and attractive, and always\
dressed with taste. She was rather pale, and had lively black eyes. She\
was not more than thirty\uc0\u8208 three, and had been five years a widow. Her\
daughter, a girl of fourteen, was partially paralyzed. The poor child had\
not been able to walk for the last six months, and was wheeled about in a\
long reclining chair. She had a charming little face, rather thin from\
illness, but full of gayety. There was a gleam of mischief in her big dark\
eyes with their long lashes. Her mother had been intending to take her\
abroad ever since the spring, but they had been detained all the summer by\
business connected with their estate. They had been staying a week in our\
town, where they had come more for purposes of business than devotion, but\
had visited Father Zossima once already, three days before. Though they\
knew that the elder scarcely saw any one, they had now suddenly turned up\
again, and urgently entreated \'93the happiness of looking once again on the\
great healer.\'94\
\
The mother was sitting on a chair by the side of her daughter\'92s invalid\
carriage, and two paces from her stood an old monk, not one of our\
monastery, but a visitor from an obscure religious house in the far north.\
He too sought the elder\'92s blessing.\
\
But Father Zossima, on entering the portico, went first straight to the\
peasants who were crowded at the foot of the three steps that led up into\
the portico. Father Zossima stood on the top step, put on his stole, and\
began blessing the women who thronged about him. One crazy woman was led\
up to him. As soon as she caught sight of the elder she began shrieking\
and writhing as though in the pains of childbirth. Laying the stole on her\
forehead, he read a short prayer over her, and she was at once soothed and\
quieted.\
\
I do not know how it may be now, but in my childhood I often happened to\
see and hear these \'93possessed\'94 women in the villages and monasteries. They\
used to be brought to mass; they would squeal and bark like a dog so that\
they were heard all over the church. But when the sacrament was carried in\
and they were led up to it, at once the \'93possession\'94 ceased, and the sick\
women were always soothed for a time. I was greatly impressed and amazed\
at this as a child; but then I heard from country neighbors and from my\
town teachers that the whole illness was simulated to avoid work, and that\
it could always be cured by suitable severity; various anecdotes were told\
to confirm this. But later on I learnt with astonishment from medical\
specialists that there is no pretense about it, that it is a terrible\
illness to which women are subject, specially prevalent among us in\
Russia, and that it is due to the hard lot of the peasant women. It is a\
disease, I was told, arising from exhausting toil too soon after hard,\
abnormal and unassisted labor in childbirth, and from the hopeless misery,\
from beatings, and so on, which some women were not able to endure like\
others. The strange and instant healing of the frantic and struggling\
woman as soon as she was led up to the holy sacrament, which had been\
explained to me as due to malingering and the trickery of the \'93clericals,\'94\
arose probably in the most natural manner. Both the women who supported\
her and the invalid herself fully believed as a truth beyond question that\
the evil spirit in possession of her could not hold out if the sick woman\
were brought to the sacrament and made to bow down before it. And so, with\
a nervous and psychically deranged woman, a sort of convulsion of the\
whole organism always took place, and was bound to take place, at the\
moment of bowing down to the sacrament, aroused by the expectation of the\
miracle of healing and the implicit belief that it would come to pass; and\
it did come to pass, though only for a moment. It was exactly the same now\
as soon as the elder touched the sick woman with the stole.\
\
Many of the women in the crowd were moved to tears of ecstasy by the\
effect of the moment: some strove to kiss the hem of his garment, others\
cried out in sing\uc0\u8208 song voices.\
\
He blessed them all and talked with some of them. The \'93possessed\'94 woman he\
knew already. She came from a village only six versts from the monastery,\
and had been brought to him before.\
\
\'93But here is one from afar.\'94 He pointed to a woman by no means old but\
very thin and wasted, with a face not merely sunburnt but almost blackened\
by exposure. She was kneeling and gazing with a fixed stare at the elder;\
there was something almost frenzied in her eyes.\
\
\'93From afar off, Father, from afar off! From two hundred miles from here.\
From afar off, Father, from afar off!\'94 the woman began in a sing\uc0\u8208 song\
voice as though she were chanting a dirge, swaying her head from side to\
side with her cheek resting in her hand.\
\
There is silent and long\uc0\u8208 suffering sorrow to be met with among the\
peasantry. It withdraws into itself and is still. But there is a grief\
that breaks out, and from that minute it bursts into tears and finds vent\
in wailing. This is particularly common with women. But it is no lighter a\
grief than the silent. Lamentations comfort only by lacerating the heart\
still more. Such grief does not desire consolation. It feeds on the sense\
of its hopelessness. Lamentations spring only from the constant craving to\
reopen the wound.\
\
\'93You are of the tradesman class?\'94 said Father Zossima, looking curiously\
at her.\
\
\'93Townfolk we are, Father, townfolk. Yet we are peasants though we live in\
the town. I have come to see you, O Father! We heard of you, Father, we\
heard of you. I have buried my little son, and I have come on a\
pilgrimage. I have been in three monasteries, but they told me, \'91Go,\
Nastasya, go to them\'92\'97that is to you. I have come; I was yesterday at the\
service, and to\uc0\u8208 day I have come to you.\'94\
\
\'93What are you weeping for?\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s my little son I\'92m grieving for, Father. He was three years old\'97three\
years all but three months. For my little boy, Father, I\'92m in anguish, for\
my little boy. He was the last one left. We had four, my Nikita and I, and\
now we\'92ve no children, our dear ones have all gone. I buried the first\
three without grieving overmuch, and now I have buried the last I can\'92t\
forget him. He seems always standing before me. He never leaves me. He has\
withered my heart. I look at his little clothes, his little shirt, his\
little boots, and I wail. I lay out all that is left of him, all his\
little things. I look at them and wail. I say to Nikita, my husband, \'91Let\
me go on a pilgrimage, master.\'92 He is a driver. We\'92re not poor people,\
Father, not poor; he drives our own horse. It\'92s all our own, the horse and\
the carriage. And what good is it all to us now? My Nikita has begun\
drinking while I am away. He\'92s sure to. It used to be so before. As soon\
as I turn my back he gives way to it. But now I don\'92t think about him.\
It\'92s three months since I left home. I\'92ve forgotten him. I\'92ve forgotten\
everything. I don\'92t want to remember. And what would our life be now\
together? I\'92ve done with him, I\'92ve done. I\'92ve done with them all. I don\'92t\
care to look upon my house and my goods. I don\'92t care to see anything at\
all!\'94\
\
\'93Listen, mother,\'94 said the elder. \'93Once in olden times a holy saint saw in\
the Temple a mother like you weeping for her little one, her only one,\
whom God had taken. \'91Knowest thou not,\'92 said the saint to her, \'91how bold\
these little ones are before the throne of God? Verily there are none\
bolder than they in the Kingdom of Heaven. \'93Thou didst give us life, O\
Lord,\'94 they say, \'93and scarcely had we looked upon it when Thou didst take\
it back again.\'94 And so boldly they ask and ask again that God gives them\
at once the rank of angels. Therefore,\'92 said the saint, \'91thou, too, O\
mother, rejoice and weep not, for thy little son is with the Lord in the\
fellowship of the angels.\'92 That\'92s what the saint said to the weeping\
mother of old. He was a great saint and he could not have spoken falsely.\
Therefore you too, mother, know that your little one is surely before the\
throne of God, is rejoicing and happy, and praying to God for you, and\
therefore weep not, but rejoice.\'94\
\
The woman listened to him, looking down with her cheek in her hand. She\
sighed deeply.\
\
\'93My Nikita tried to comfort me with the same words as you. \'91Foolish one,\'92\
he said, \'91why weep? Our son is no doubt singing with the angels before\
God.\'92 He says that to me, but he weeps himself. I see that he cries like\
me. \'91I know, Nikita,\'92 said I. \'91Where could he be if not with the Lord God?\
Only, here with us now he is not as he used to sit beside us before.\'92 And\
if only I could look upon him one little time, if only I could peep at him\
one little time, without going up to him, without speaking, if I could be\
hidden in a corner and only see him for one little minute, hear him\
playing in the yard, calling in his little voice, \'91Mammy, where are you?\'92\
If only I could hear him pattering with his little feet about the room\
just once, only once; for so often, so often I remember how he used to run\
to me and shout and laugh, if only I could hear his little feet I should\
know him! But he\'92s gone, Father, he\'92s gone, and I shall never hear him\
again. Here\'92s his little sash, but him I shall never see or hear now.\'94\
\
She drew out of her bosom her boy\'92s little embroidered sash, and as soon\
as she looked at it she began shaking with sobs, hiding her eyes with her\
fingers through which the tears flowed in a sudden stream.\
\
\'93It is Rachel of old,\'94 said the elder, \'93weeping for her children, and will\
not be comforted because they are not. Such is the lot set on earth for\
you mothers. Be not comforted. Consolation is not what you need. Weep and\
be not consoled, but weep. Only every time that you weep be sure to\
remember that your little son is one of the angels of God, that he looks\
down from there at you and sees you, and rejoices at your tears, and\
points at them to the Lord God; and a long while yet will you keep that\
great mother\'92s grief. But it will turn in the end into quiet joy, and your\
bitter tears will be only tears of tender sorrow that purifies the heart\
and delivers it from sin. And I shall pray for the peace of your child\'92s\
soul. What was his name?\'94\
\
\'93Alexey, Father.\'94\
\
\'93A sweet name. After Alexey, the man of God?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, Father.\'94\
\
\'93What a saint he was! I will remember him, mother, and your grief in my\
prayers, and I will pray for your husband\'92s health. It is a sin for you to\
leave him. Your little one will see from heaven that you have forsaken his\
father, and will weep over you. Why do you trouble his happiness? He is\
living, for the soul lives for ever, and though he is not in the house he\
is near you, unseen. How can he go into the house when you say that the\
house is hateful to you? To whom is he to go if he find you not together,\
his father and mother? He comes to you in dreams now, and you grieve. But\
then he will send you gentle dreams. Go to your husband, mother; go this\
very day.\'94\
\
\'93I will go, Father, at your word. I will go. You\'92ve gone straight to my\
heart. My Nikita, my Nikita, you are waiting for me,\'94 the woman began in a\
sing\uc0\u8208 song voice; but the elder had already turned away to a very old\
woman, dressed like a dweller in the town, not like a pilgrim. Her eyes\
showed that she had come with an object, and in order to say something.\
She said she was the widow of a non\uc0\u8208 commissioned officer, and lived close\
by in the town. Her son Vasenka was in the commissariat service, and had\
gone to Irkutsk in Siberia. He had written twice from there, but now a\
year had passed since he had written. She did inquire about him, but she\
did not know the proper place to inquire.\
\
\'93Only the other day Stepanida Ilyinishna\'97she\'92s a rich merchant\'92s wife\'97said\
to me, \'91You go, Prohorovna, and put your son\'92s name down for prayer in the\
church, and pray for the peace of his soul as though he were dead. His\
soul will be troubled,\'92 she said, \'91and he will write you a letter.\'92 And\
Stepanida Ilyinishna told me it was a certain thing which had been many\
times tried. Only I am in doubt.... Oh, you light of ours! is it true or\
false, and would it be right?\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t think of it. It\'92s shameful to ask the question. How is it possible\
to pray for the peace of a living soul? And his own mother too! It\'92s a\
great sin, akin to sorcery. Only for your ignorance it is forgiven you.\
Better pray to the Queen of Heaven, our swift defense and help, for his\
good health, and that she may forgive you for your error. And another\
thing I will tell you, Prohorovna. Either he will soon come back to you,\
your son, or he will be sure to send a letter. Go, and henceforward be in\
peace. Your son is alive, I tell you.\'94\
\
\'93Dear Father, God reward you, our benefactor, who prays for all of us and\
for our sins!\'94\
\
But the elder had already noticed in the crowd two glowing eyes fixed upon\
him. An exhausted, consumptive\uc0\u8208 looking, though young peasant woman was\
gazing at him in silence. Her eyes besought him, but she seemed afraid to\
approach.\
\
\'93What is it, my child?\'94\
\
\'93Absolve my soul, Father,\'94 she articulated softly, and slowly sank on her\
knees and bowed down at his feet. \'93I have sinned, Father. I am afraid of\
my sin.\'94\
\
The elder sat down on the lower step. The woman crept closer to him, still\
on her knees.\
\
\'93I am a widow these three years,\'94 she began in a half\uc0\u8208 whisper, with a sort\
of shudder. \'93I had a hard life with my husband. He was an old man. He used\
to beat me cruelly. He lay ill; I thought looking at him, if he were to\
get well, if he were to get up again, what then? And then the thought came\
to me\'97\'94\
\
\'93Stay!\'94 said the elder, and he put his ear close to her lips.\
\
The woman went on in a low whisper, so that it was almost impossible to\
catch anything. She had soon done.\
\
\'93Three years ago?\'94 asked the elder.\
\
\'93Three years. At first I didn\'92t think about it, but now I\'92ve begun to be\
ill, and the thought never leaves me.\'94\
\
\'93Have you come from far?\'94\
\
\'93Over three hundred miles away.\'94\
\
\'93Have you told it in confession?\'94\
\
\'93I have confessed it. Twice I have confessed it.\'94\
\
\'93Have you been admitted to Communion?\'94\
\
\'93Yes. I am afraid. I am afraid to die.\'94\
\
\'93Fear nothing and never be afraid; and don\'92t fret. If only your penitence\
fail not, God will forgive all. There is no sin, and there can be no sin\
on all the earth, which the Lord will not forgive to the truly repentant!\
Man cannot commit a sin so great as to exhaust the infinite love of God.\
Can there be a sin which could exceed the love of God? Think only of\
repentance, continual repentance, but dismiss fear altogether. Believe\
that God loves you as you cannot conceive; that He loves you with your\
sin, in your sin. It has been said of old that over one repentant sinner\
there is more joy in heaven than over ten righteous men. Go, and fear not.\
Be not bitter against men. Be not angry if you are wronged. Forgive the\
dead man in your heart what wrong he did you. Be reconciled with him in\
truth. If you are penitent, you love. And if you love you are of God. All\
things are atoned for, all things are saved by love. If I, a sinner, even\
as you are, am tender with you and have pity on you, how much more will\
God. Love is such a priceless treasure that you can redeem the whole world\
by it, and expiate not only your own sins but the sins of others.\'94\
\
He signed her three times with the cross, took from his own neck a little\
ikon and put it upon her. She bowed down to the earth without speaking.\
\
He got up and looked cheerfully at a healthy peasant woman with a tiny\
baby in her arms.\
\
\'93From Vyshegorye, dear Father.\'94\
\
\'93Five miles you have dragged yourself with the baby. What do you want?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve come to look at you. I have been to you before\'97or have you\
forgotten? You\'92ve no great memory if you\'92ve forgotten me. They told us you\
were ill. Thinks I, I\'92ll go and see him for myself. Now I see you, and\
you\'92re not ill! You\'92ll live another twenty years. God bless you! There are\
plenty to pray for you; how should you be ill?\'94\
\
\'93I thank you for all, daughter.\'94\
\
\'93By the way, I have a thing to ask, not a great one. Here are sixty\
copecks. Give them, dear Father, to some one poorer than me. I thought as\
I came along, better give through him. He\'92ll know whom to give to.\'94\
\
\'93Thanks, my dear, thanks! You are a good woman. I love you. I will do so\
certainly. Is that your little girl?\'94\
\
\'93My little girl, Father, Lizaveta.\'94\
\
\'93May the Lord bless you both, you and your babe Lizaveta! You have\
gladdened my heart, mother. Farewell, dear children, farewell, dear ones.\'94\
\
He blessed them all and bowed low to them.\
\
\
\
Chapter IV. A Lady Of Little Faith\
\
\
A visitor looking on the scene of his conversation with the peasants and\
his blessing them shed silent tears and wiped them away with her\
handkerchief. She was a sentimental society lady of genuinely good\
disposition in many respects. When the elder went up to her at last she\
met him enthusiastically.\
\
\'93Ah, what I have been feeling, looking on at this touching scene!...\'94 She\
could not go on for emotion. \'93Oh, I understand the people\'92s love for you.\
I love the people myself. I want to love them. And who could help loving\
them, our splendid Russian people, so simple in their greatness!\'94\
\
\'93How is your daughter\'92s health? You wanted to talk to me again?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I have been urgently begging for it, I have prayed for it! I was\
ready to fall on my knees and kneel for three days at your windows until\
you let me in. We have come, great healer, to express our ardent\
gratitude. You have healed my Lise, healed her completely, merely by\
praying over her last Thursday and laying your hands upon her. We have\
hastened here to kiss those hands, to pour out our feelings and our\
homage.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean by healed? But she is still lying down in her chair.\'94\
\
\'93But her night fevers have entirely ceased ever since Thursday,\'94 said the\
lady with nervous haste. \'93And that\'92s not all. Her legs are stronger. This\
morning she got up well; she had slept all night. Look at her rosy cheeks,\
her bright eyes! She used to be always crying, but now she laughs and is\
gay and happy. This morning she insisted on my letting her stand up, and\
she stood up for a whole minute without any support. She wagers that in a\
fortnight she\'92ll be dancing a quadrille. I\'92ve called in Doctor\
Herzenstube. He shrugged his shoulders and said, \'91I am amazed; I can make\
nothing of it.\'92 And would you have us not come here to disturb you, not\
fly here to thank you? Lise, thank him\'97thank him!\'94\
\
Lise\'92s pretty little laughing face became suddenly serious. She rose in\
her chair as far as she could and, looking at the elder, clasped her hands\
before him, but could not restrain herself and broke into laughter.\
\
\'93It\'92s at him,\'94 she said, pointing to Alyosha, with childish vexation at\
herself for not being able to repress her mirth.\
\
If any one had looked at Alyosha standing a step behind the elder, he\
would have caught a quick flush crimsoning his cheeks in an instant. His\
eyes shone and he looked down.\
\
\'93She has a message for you, Alexey Fyodorovitch. How are you?\'94 the mother\
went on, holding out her exquisitely gloved hand to Alyosha.\
\
The elder turned round and all at once looked attentively at Alyosha. The\
latter went nearer to Lise and, smiling in a strangely awkward way, held\
out his hand to her too. Lise assumed an important air.\
\
\'93Katerina Ivanovna has sent you this through me.\'94 She handed him a little\
note. \'93She particularly begs you to go and see her as soon as possible;\
that you will not fail her, but will be sure to come.\'94\
\
\'93She asks me to go and see her? Me? What for?\'94 Alyosha muttered in great\
astonishment. His face at once looked anxious. \'93Oh, it\'92s all to do with\
Dmitri Fyodorovitch and\'97what has happened lately,\'94 the mother explained\
hurriedly. \'93Katerina Ivanovna has made up her mind, but she must see you\
about it.... Why, of course, I can\'92t say. But she wants to see you at\
once. And you will go to her, of course. It is a Christian duty.\'94\
\
\'93I have only seen her once,\'94 Alyosha protested with the same perplexity.\
\
\'93Oh, she is such a lofty, incomparable creature! If only for her\
suffering.... Think what she has gone through, what she is enduring now!\
Think what awaits her! It\'92s all terrible, terrible!\'94\
\
\'93Very well, I will come,\'94 Alyosha decided, after rapidly scanning the\
brief, enigmatic note, which consisted of an urgent entreaty that he would\
come, without any sort of explanation.\
\
\'93Oh, how sweet and generous that would be of you!\'94 cried Lise with sudden\
animation. \'93I told mamma you\'92d be sure not to go. I said you were saving\
your soul. How splendid you are! I\'92ve always thought you were splendid.\
How glad I am to tell you so!\'94\
\
\'93Lise!\'94 said her mother impressively, though she smiled after she had said\
it.\
\
\'93You have quite forgotten us, Alexey Fyodorovitch,\'94 she said; \'93you never\
come to see us. Yet Lise has told me twice that she is never happy except\
with you.\'94\
\
Alyosha raised his downcast eyes and again flushed, and again smiled\
without knowing why. But the elder was no longer watching him. He had\
begun talking to a monk who, as mentioned before, had been awaiting his\
entrance by Lise\'92s chair. He was evidently a monk of the humblest, that is\
of the peasant, class, of a narrow outlook, but a true believer, and, in\
his own way, a stubborn one. He announced that he had come from the far\
north, from Obdorsk, from Saint Sylvester, and was a member of a poor\
monastery, consisting of only ten monks. The elder gave him his blessing\
and invited him to come to his cell whenever he liked.\
\
\'93How can you presume to do such deeds?\'94 the monk asked suddenly, pointing\
solemnly and significantly at Lise. He was referring to her \'93healing.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s too early, of course, to speak of that. Relief is not complete cure,\
and may proceed from different causes. But if there has been any healing,\
it is by no power but God\'92s will. It\'92s all from God. Visit me, Father,\'94 he\
added to the monk. \'93It\'92s not often I can see visitors. I am ill, and I\
know that my days are numbered.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no, no! God will not take you from us. You will live a long, long\
time yet,\'94 cried the lady. \'93And in what way are you ill? You look so well,\
so gay and happy.\'94\
\
\'93I am extraordinarily better to\uc0\u8208 day. But I know that it\'92s only for a\
moment. I understand my disease now thoroughly. If I seem so happy to you,\
you could never say anything that would please me so much. For men are\
made for happiness, and any one who is completely happy has a right to say\
to himself, \'91I am doing God\'92s will on earth.\'92 All the righteous, all the\
saints, all the holy martyrs were happy.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, how you speak! What bold and lofty words!\'94 cried the lady. \'93You seem\
to pierce with your words. And yet\'97happiness, happiness\'97where is it? Who\
can say of himself that he is happy? Oh, since you have been so good as to\
let us see you once more to\uc0\u8208 day, let me tell you what I could not utter\
last time, what I dared not say, all I am suffering and have been for so\
long! I am suffering! Forgive me! I am suffering!\'94\
\
And in a rush of fervent feeling she clasped her hands before him.\
\
\'93From what specially?\'94\
\
\'93I suffer ... from lack of faith.\'94\
\
\'93Lack of faith in God?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no, no! I dare not even think of that. But the future life\'97it is such\
an enigma! And no one, no one can solve it. Listen! You are a healer, you\
are deeply versed in the human soul, and of course I dare not expect you\
to believe me entirely, but I assure you on my word of honor that I am not\
speaking lightly now. The thought of the life beyond the grave distracts\
me to anguish, to terror. And I don\'92t know to whom to appeal, and have not\
dared to all my life. And now I am so bold as to ask you. Oh, God! What\
will you think of me now?\'94\
\
She clasped her hands.\
\
\'93Don\'92t distress yourself about my opinion of you,\'94 said the elder. \'93I\
quite believe in the sincerity of your suffering.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, how thankful I am to you! You see, I shut my eyes and ask myself if\
every one has faith, where did it come from? And then they do say that it\
all comes from terror at the menacing phenomena of nature, and that none\
of it\'92s real. And I say to myself, \'91What if I\'92ve been believing all my\
life, and when I come to die there\'92s nothing but the burdocks growing on\
my grave?\'92 as I read in some author. It\'92s awful! How\'97how can I get back my\
faith? But I only believed when I was a little child, mechanically,\
without thinking of anything. How, how is one to prove it? I have come now\
to lay my soul before you and to ask you about it. If I let this chance\
slip, no one all my life will answer me. How can I prove it? How can I\
convince myself? Oh, how unhappy I am! I stand and look about me and see\
that scarcely any one else cares; no one troubles his head about it, and\
I\'92m the only one who can\'92t stand it. It\'92s deadly\'97deadly!\'94\
\
\'93No doubt. But there\'92s no proving it, though you can be convinced of it.\'94\
\
\'93How?\'94\
\
\'93By the experience of active love. Strive to love your neighbor actively\
and indefatigably. In as far as you advance in love you will grow surer of\
the reality of God and of the immortality of your soul. If you attain to\
perfect self\uc0\u8208 forgetfulness in the love of your neighbor, then you will\
believe without doubt, and no doubt can possibly enter your soul. This has\
been tried. This is certain.\'94\
\
\'93In active love? There\'92s another question\'97and such a question! You see, I\
so love humanity that\'97would you believe it?\'97I often dream of forsaking all\
that I have, leaving Lise, and becoming a sister of mercy. I close my eyes\
and think and dream, and at that moment I feel full of strength to\
overcome all obstacles. No wounds, no festering sores could at that moment\
frighten me. I would bind them up and wash them with my own hands. I would\
nurse the afflicted. I would be ready to kiss such wounds.\'94\
\
\'93It is much, and well that your mind is full of such dreams and not\
others. Sometime, unawares, you may do a good deed in reality.\'94\
\
\'93Yes. But could I endure such a life for long?\'94 the lady went on\
fervently, almost frantically. \'93That\'92s the chief question\'97that\'92s my most\
agonizing question. I shut my eyes and ask myself, \'91Would you persevere\
long on that path? And if the patient whose wounds you are washing did not\
meet you with gratitude, but worried you with his whims, without valuing\
or remarking your charitable services, began abusing you and rudely\
commanding you, and complaining to the superior authorities of you (which\
often happens when people are in great suffering)\'97what then? Would you\
persevere in your love, or not?\'92 And do you know, I came with horror to\
the conclusion that, if anything could dissipate my love to humanity, it\
would be ingratitude. In short, I am a hired servant, I expect my payment\
at once\'97that is, praise, and the repayment of love with love. Otherwise I\
am incapable of loving any one.\'94\
\
She was in a very paroxysm of self\uc0\u8208 castigation, and, concluding, she\
looked with defiant resolution at the elder.\
\
\'93It\'92s just the same story as a doctor once told me,\'94 observed the elder.\
\'93He was a man getting on in years, and undoubtedly clever. He spoke as\
frankly as you, though in jest, in bitter jest. \'91I love humanity,\'92 he\
said, \'91but I wonder at myself. The more I love humanity in general, the\
less I love man in particular. In my dreams,\'92 he said, \'91I have often come\
to making enthusiastic schemes for the service of humanity, and perhaps I\
might actually have faced crucifixion if it had been suddenly necessary;\
and yet I am incapable of living in the same room with any one for two\
days together, as I know by experience. As soon as any one is near me, his\
personality disturbs my self\uc0\u8208 complacency and restricts my freedom. In\
twenty\uc0\u8208 four hours I begin to hate the best of men: one because he\'92s too\
long over his dinner; another because he has a cold and keeps on blowing\
his nose. I become hostile to people the moment they come close to me. But\
it has always happened that the more I detest men individually the more\
ardent becomes my love for humanity.\'92 \'94\
\
\'93But what\'92s to be done? What can one do in such a case? Must one despair?\'94\
\
\'93No. It is enough that you are distressed at it. Do what you can, and it\
will be reckoned unto you. Much is done already in you since you can so\
deeply and sincerely know yourself. If you have been talking to me so\
sincerely, simply to gain approbation for your frankness, as you did from\
me just now, then of course you will not attain to anything in the\
achievement of real love; it will all get no further than dreams, and your\
whole life will slip away like a phantom. In that case you will naturally\
cease to think of the future life too, and will of yourself grow calmer\
after a fashion in the end.\'94\
\
\'93You have crushed me! Only now, as you speak, I understand that I was\
really only seeking your approbation for my sincerity when I told you I\
could not endure ingratitude. You have revealed me to myself. You have\
seen through me and explained me to myself!\'94\
\
\'93Are you speaking the truth? Well, now, after such a confession, I believe\
that you are sincere and good at heart. If you do not attain happiness,\
always remember that you are on the right road, and try not to leave it.\
Above all, avoid falsehood, every kind of falsehood, especially falseness\
to yourself. Watch over your own deceitfulness and look into it every\
hour, every minute. Avoid being scornful, both to others and to yourself.\
What seems to you bad within you will grow purer from the very fact of\
your observing it in yourself. Avoid fear, too, though fear is only the\
consequence of every sort of falsehood. Never be frightened at your own\
faint\uc0\u8208 heartedness in attaining love. Don\'92t be frightened overmuch even at\
your evil actions. I am sorry I can say nothing more consoling to you, for\
love in action is a harsh and dreadful thing compared with love in dreams.\
Love in dreams is greedy for immediate action, rapidly performed and in\
the sight of all. Men will even give their lives if only the ordeal does\
not last long but is soon over, with all looking on and applauding as\
though on the stage. But active love is labor and fortitude, and for some\
people too, perhaps, a complete science. But I predict that just when you\
see with horror that in spite of all your efforts you are getting farther\
from your goal instead of nearer to it\'97at that very moment I predict that\
you will reach it and behold clearly the miraculous power of the Lord who\
has been all the time loving and mysteriously guiding you. Forgive me for\
not being able to stay longer with you. They are waiting for me. Good\uc0\u8208 by.\'94\
\
The lady was weeping.\
\
\'93Lise, Lise! Bless her\'97bless her!\'94 she cried, starting up suddenly.\
\
\'93She does not deserve to be loved. I have seen her naughtiness all along,\'94\
the elder said jestingly. \'93Why have you been laughing at Alexey?\'94\
\
Lise had in fact been occupied in mocking at him all the time. She had\
noticed before that Alyosha was shy and tried not to look at her, and she\
found this extremely amusing. She waited intently to catch his eye.\
Alyosha, unable to endure her persistent stare, was irresistibly and\
suddenly drawn to glance at her, and at once she smiled triumphantly in\
his face. Alyosha was even more disconcerted and vexed. At last he turned\
away from her altogether and hid behind the elder\'92s back. After a few\
minutes, drawn by the same irresistible force, he turned again to see\
whether he was being looked at or not, and found Lise almost hanging out\
of her chair to peep sideways at him, eagerly waiting for him to look.\
Catching his eye, she laughed so that the elder could not help saying,\
\'93Why do you make fun of him like that, naughty girl?\'94\
\
Lise suddenly and quite unexpectedly blushed. Her eyes flashed and her\
face became quite serious. She began speaking quickly and nervously in a\
warm and resentful voice:\
\
\'93Why has he forgotten everything, then? He used to carry me about when I\
was little. We used to play together. He used to come to teach me to read,\
do you know. Two years ago, when he went away, he said that he would never\
forget me, that we were friends for ever, for ever, for ever! And now he\'92s\
afraid of me all at once. Am I going to eat him? Why doesn\'92t he want to\
come near me? Why doesn\'92t he talk? Why won\'92t he come and see us? It\'92s not\
that you won\'92t let him. We know that he goes everywhere. It\'92s not good\
manners for me to invite him. He ought to have thought of it first, if he\
hasn\'92t forgotten me. No, now he\'92s saving his soul! Why have you put that\
long gown on him? If he runs he\'92ll fall.\'94\
\
And suddenly she hid her face in her hand and went off into irresistible,\
prolonged, nervous, inaudible laughter. The elder listened to her with a\
smile, and blessed her tenderly. As she kissed his hand she suddenly\
pressed it to her eyes and began crying.\
\
\'93Don\'92t be angry with me. I\'92m silly and good for nothing ... and perhaps\
Alyosha\'92s right, quite right, in not wanting to come and see such a\
ridiculous girl.\'94\
\
\'93I will certainly send him,\'94 said the elder.\
\
\
\
Chapter V. So Be It! So Be It!\
\
\
The elder\'92s absence from his cell had lasted for about twenty\uc0\u8208 five\
minutes. It was more than half\uc0\u8208 past twelve, but Dmitri, on whose account\
they had all met there, had still not appeared. But he seemed almost to be\
forgotten, and when the elder entered the cell again, he found his guests\
engaged in eager conversation. Ivan and the two monks took the leading\
share in it. Mi\'fcsov, too, was trying to take a part, and apparently very\
eagerly, in the conversation. But he was unsuccessful in this also. He was\
evidently in the background, and his remarks were treated with neglect,\
which increased his irritability. He had had intellectual encounters with\
Ivan before and he could not endure a certain carelessness Ivan showed\
him.\
\
\'93Hitherto at least I have stood in the front ranks of all that is\
progressive in Europe, and here the new generation positively ignores us,\'94\
he thought.\
\
Fyodor Pavlovitch, who had given his word to sit still and be quiet, had\
actually been quiet for some time, but he watched his neighbor Mi\'fcsov with\
an ironical little smile, obviously enjoying his discomfiture. He had been\
waiting for some time to pay off old scores, and now he could not let the\
opportunity slip. Bending over his shoulder he began teasing him again in\
a whisper.\
\
\'93Why didn\'92t you go away just now, after the \'91courteously kissing\'92? Why did\
you consent to remain in such unseemly company? It was because you felt\
insulted and aggrieved, and you remained to vindicate yourself by showing\
off your intelligence. Now you won\'92t go till you\'92ve displayed your\
intellect to them.\'94\
\
\'93You again?... On the contrary, I\'92m just going.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ll be the last, the last of all to go!\'94 Fyodor Pavlovitch delivered\
him another thrust, almost at the moment of Father Zossima\'92s return.\
\
The discussion died down for a moment, but the elder, seating himself in\
his former place, looked at them all as though cordially inviting them to\
go on. Alyosha, who knew every expression of his face, saw that he was\
fearfully exhausted and making a great effort. Of late he had been liable\
to fainting fits from exhaustion. His face had the pallor that was common\
before such attacks, and his lips were white. But he evidently did not\
want to break up the party. He seemed to have some special object of his\
own in keeping them. What object? Alyosha watched him intently.\
\
\'93We are discussing this gentleman\'92s most interesting article,\'94 said Father\
Iosif, the librarian, addressing the elder, and indicating Ivan. \'93He\
brings forward much that is new, but I think the argument cuts both ways.\
It is an article written in answer to a book by an ecclesiastical\
authority on the question of the ecclesiastical court, and the scope of\
its jurisdiction.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m sorry I have not read your article, but I\'92ve heard of it,\'94 said the\
elder, looking keenly and intently at Ivan.\
\
\'93He takes up a most interesting position,\'94 continued the Father Librarian.\
\'93As far as Church jurisdiction is concerned he is apparently quite opposed\
to the separation of Church from State.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s interesting. But in what sense?\'94 Father Zossima asked Ivan.\
\
The latter, at last, answered him, not condescendingly, as Alyosha had\
feared, but with modesty and reserve, with evident goodwill and apparently\
without the slightest _arri\'e8re\uc0\u8208 pens\'e9e_.\
\
\'93I start from the position that this confusion of elements, that is, of\
the essential principles of Church and State, will, of course, go on for\
ever, in spite of the fact that it is impossible for them to mingle, and\
that the confusion of these elements cannot lead to any consistent or even\
normal results, for there is falsity at the very foundation of it.\
Compromise between the Church and State in such questions as, for\
instance, jurisdiction, is, to my thinking, impossible in any real sense.\
My clerical opponent maintains that the Church holds a precise and defined\
position in the State. I maintain, on the contrary, that the Church ought\
to include the whole State, and not simply to occupy a corner in it, and,\
if this is, for some reason, impossible at present, then it ought, in\
reality, to be set up as the direct and chief aim of the future\
development of Christian society!\'94\
\
\'93Perfectly true,\'94 Father Pa\'efssy, the silent and learned monk, assented\
with fervor and decision.\
\
\'93The purest Ultramontanism!\'94 cried Mi\'fcsov impatiently, crossing and\
recrossing his legs.\
\
\'93Oh, well, we have no mountains,\'94 cried Father Iosif, and turning to the\
elder he continued: \'93Observe the answer he makes to the following\
\'91fundamental and essential\'92 propositions of his opponent, who is, you must\
note, an ecclesiastic. First, that \'91no social organization can or ought to\
arrogate to itself power to dispose of the civic and political rights of\
its members.\'92 Secondly, that \'91criminal and civil jurisdiction ought not to\
belong to the Church, and is inconsistent with its nature, both as a\
divine institution and as an organization of men for religious objects,\'92\
and, finally, in the third place, \'91the Church is a kingdom not of this\
world.\'92 \'94\
\
\'93A most unworthy play upon words for an ecclesiastic!\'94 Father Pa\'efssy could\
not refrain from breaking in again. \'93I have read the book which you have\
answered,\'94 he added, addressing Ivan, \'93and was astounded at the words \'91the\
Church is a kingdom not of this world.\'92 If it is not of this world, then\
it cannot exist on earth at all. In the Gospel, the words \'91not of this\
world\'92 are not used in that sense. To play with such words is\
indefensible. Our Lord Jesus Christ came to set up the Church upon earth.\
The Kingdom of Heaven, of course, is not of this world, but in Heaven; but\
it is only entered through the Church which has been founded and\
established upon earth. And so a frivolous play upon words in such a\
connection is unpardonable and improper. The Church is, in truth, a\
kingdom and ordained to rule, and in the end must undoubtedly become the\
kingdom ruling over all the earth. For that we have the divine promise.\'94\
\
He ceased speaking suddenly, as though checking himself. After listening\
attentively and respectfully Ivan went on, addressing the elder with\
perfect composure and as before with ready cordiality:\
\
\'93The whole point of my article lies in the fact that during the first\
three centuries Christianity only existed on earth in the Church and was\
nothing but the Church. When the pagan Roman Empire desired to become\
Christian, it inevitably happened that, by becoming Christian, it included\
the Church but remained a pagan State in very many of its departments. In\
reality this was bound to happen. But Rome as a State retained too much of\
the pagan civilization and culture, as, for example, in the very objects\
and fundamental principles of the State. The Christian Church entering\
into the State could, of course, surrender no part of its fundamental\
principles\'97the rock on which it stands\'97and could pursue no other aims than\
those which have been ordained and revealed by God Himself, and among them\
that of drawing the whole world, and therefore the ancient pagan State\
itself, into the Church. In that way (that is, with a view to the future)\
it is not the Church that should seek a definite position in the State,\
like \'91every social organization,\'92 or as \'91an organization of men for\
religious purposes\'92 (as my opponent calls the Church), but, on the\
contrary, every earthly State should be, in the end, completely\
transformed into the Church and should become nothing else but a Church,\
rejecting every purpose incongruous with the aims of the Church. All this\
will not degrade it in any way or take from its honor and glory as a great\
State, nor from the glory of its rulers, but only turns it from a false,\
still pagan, and mistaken path to the true and rightful path, which alone\
leads to the eternal goal. This is why the author of the book _On the\
Foundations of Church Jurisdiction_ would have judged correctly if, in\
seeking and laying down those foundations, he had looked upon them as a\
temporary compromise inevitable in our sinful and imperfect days. But as\
soon as the author ventures to declare that the foundations which he\
predicates now, part of which Father Iosif just enumerated, are the\
permanent, essential, and eternal foundations, he is going directly\
against the Church and its sacred and eternal vocation. That is the gist\
of my article.\'94\
\
\'93That is, in brief,\'94 Father Pa\'efssy began again, laying stress on each\
word, \'93according to certain theories only too clearly formulated in the\
nineteenth century, the Church ought to be transformed into the State, as\
though this would be an advance from a lower to a higher form, so as to\
disappear into it, making way for science, for the spirit of the age, and\
civilization. And if the Church resists and is unwilling, some corner will\
be set apart for her in the State, and even that under control\'97and this\
will be so everywhere in all modern European countries. But Russian hopes\
and conceptions demand not that the Church should pass as from a lower\
into a higher type into the State, but, on the contrary, that the State\
should end by being worthy to become only the Church and nothing else. So\
be it! So be it!\'94\
\
\'93Well, I confess you\'92ve reassured me somewhat,\'94 Mi\'fcsov said smiling, again\
crossing his legs. \'93So far as I understand, then, the realization of such\
an ideal is infinitely remote, at the second coming of Christ. That\'92s as\
you please. It\'92s a beautiful Utopian dream of the abolition of war,\
diplomacy, banks, and so on\'97something after the fashion of socialism,\
indeed. But I imagined that it was all meant seriously, and that the\
Church might be _now_ going to try criminals, and sentence them to\
beating, prison, and even death.\'94\
\
\'93But if there were none but the ecclesiastical court, the Church would not\
even now sentence a criminal to prison or to death. Crime and the way of\
regarding it would inevitably change, not all at once of course, but\
fairly soon,\'94 Ivan replied calmly, without flinching.\
\
\'93Are you serious?\'94 Mi\'fcsov glanced keenly at him.\
\
\'93If everything became the Church, the Church would exclude all the\
criminal and disobedient, and would not cut off their heads,\'94 Ivan went\
on. \'93I ask you, what would become of the excluded? He would be cut off\
then not only from men, as now, but from Christ. By his crime he would\
have transgressed not only against men but against the Church of Christ.\
This is so even now, of course, strictly speaking, but it is not clearly\
enunciated, and very, very often the criminal of to\uc0\u8208 day compromises with\
his conscience: \'91I steal,\'92 he says, \'91but I don\'92t go against the Church.\
I\'92m not an enemy of Christ.\'92 That\'92s what the criminal of to\uc0\u8208 day is\
continually saying to himself, but when the Church takes the place of the\
State it will be difficult for him, in opposition to the Church all over\
the world, to say: \'91All men are mistaken, all in error, all mankind are\
the false Church. I, a thief and murderer, am the only true Christian\
Church.\'92 It will be very difficult to say this to himself; it requires a\
rare combination of unusual circumstances. Now, on the other side, take\
the Church\'92s own view of crime: is it not bound to renounce the present\
almost pagan attitude, and to change from a mechanical cutting off of its\
tainted member for the preservation of society, as at present, into\
completely and honestly adopting the idea of the regeneration of the man,\
of his reformation and salvation?\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean? I fail to understand again,\'94 Mi\'fcsov interrupted. \'93Some\
sort of dream again. Something shapeless and even incomprehensible. What\
is excommunication? What sort of exclusion? I suspect you are simply\
amusing yourself, Ivan Fyodorovitch.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, but you know, in reality it is so now,\'94 said the elder suddenly, and\
all turned to him at once. \'93If it were not for the Church of Christ there\
would be nothing to restrain the criminal from evil\uc0\u8208 doing, no real\
chastisement for it afterwards; none, that is, but the mechanical\
punishment spoken of just now, which in the majority of cases only\
embitters the heart; and not the real punishment, the only effectual one,\
the only deterrent and softening one, which lies in the recognition of sin\
by conscience.\'94\
\
\'93How is that, may one inquire?\'94 asked Mi\'fcsov, with lively curiosity.\
\
\'93Why,\'94 began the elder, \'93all these sentences to exile with hard labor, and\
formerly with flogging also, reform no one, and what\'92s more, deter hardly\
a single criminal, and the number of crimes does not diminish but is\
continually on the increase. You must admit that. Consequently the\
security of society is not preserved, for, although the obnoxious member\
is mechanically cut off and sent far away out of sight, another criminal\
always comes to take his place at once, and often two of them. If anything\
does preserve society, even in our time, and does regenerate and transform\
the criminal, it is only the law of Christ speaking in his conscience. It\
is only by recognizing his wrong\uc0\u8208 doing as a son of a Christian\
society\'97that is, of the Church\'97that he recognizes his sin against\
society\'97that is, against the Church. So that it is only against the\
Church, and not against the State, that the criminal of to\uc0\u8208 day can\
recognize that he has sinned. If society, as a Church, had jurisdiction,\
then it would know when to bring back from exclusion and to reunite to\
itself. Now the Church having no real jurisdiction, but only the power of\
moral condemnation, withdraws of her own accord from punishing the\
criminal actively. She does not excommunicate him but simply persists in\
motherly exhortation of him. What is more, the Church even tries to\
preserve all Christian communion with the criminal. She admits him to\
church services, to the holy sacrament, gives him alms, and treats him\
more as a captive than as a convict. And what would become of the\
criminal, O Lord, if even the Christian society\'97that is, the Church\'97were\
to reject him even as the civil law rejects him and cuts him off? What\
would become of him if the Church punished him with her excommunication as\
the direct consequence of the secular law? There could be no more terrible\
despair, at least for a Russian criminal, for Russian criminals still have\
faith. Though, who knows, perhaps then a fearful thing would happen,\
perhaps the despairing heart of the criminal would lose its faith and then\
what would become of him? But the Church, like a tender, loving mother,\
holds aloof from active punishment herself, as the sinner is too severely\
punished already by the civil law, and there must be at least some one to\
have pity on him. The Church holds aloof, above all, because its judgment\
is the only one that contains the truth, and therefore cannot practically\
and morally be united to any other judgment even as a temporary\
compromise. She can enter into no compact about that. The foreign\
criminal, they say, rarely repents, for the very doctrines of to\uc0\u8208 day\
confirm him in the idea that his crime is not a crime, but only a reaction\
against an unjustly oppressive force. Society cuts him off completely by a\
force that triumphs over him mechanically and (so at least they say of\
themselves in Europe) accompanies this exclusion with hatred,\
forgetfulness, and the most profound indifference as to the ultimate fate\
of the erring brother. In this way, it all takes place without the\
compassionate intervention of the Church, for in many cases there are no\
churches there at all, for though ecclesiastics and splendid church\
buildings remain, the churches themselves have long ago striven to pass\
from Church into State and to disappear in it completely. So it seems at\
least in Lutheran countries. As for Rome, it was proclaimed a State\
instead of a Church a thousand years ago. And so the criminal is no longer\
conscious of being a member of the Church and sinks into despair. If he\
returns to society, often it is with such hatred that society itself\
instinctively cuts him off. You can judge for yourself how it must end. In\
many cases it would seem to be the same with us, but the difference is\
that besides the established law courts we have the Church too, which\
always keeps up relations with the criminal as a dear and still precious\
son. And besides that, there is still preserved, though only in thought,\
the judgment of the Church, which though no longer existing in practice is\
still living as a dream for the future, and is, no doubt, instinctively\
recognized by the criminal in his soul. What was said here just now is\
true too, that is, that if the jurisdiction of the Church were introduced\
in practice in its full force, that is, if the whole of the society were\
changed into the Church, not only the judgment of the Church would have\
influence on the reformation of the criminal such as it never has now, but\
possibly also the crimes themselves would be incredibly diminished. And\
there can be no doubt that the Church would look upon the criminal and the\
crime of the future in many cases quite differently and would succeed in\
restoring the excluded, in restraining those who plan evil, and in\
regenerating the fallen. It is true,\'94 said Father Zossima, with a smile,\
\'93the Christian society now is not ready and is only resting on some seven\
righteous men, but as they are never lacking, it will continue still\
unshaken in expectation of its complete transformation from a society\
almost heathen in character into a single universal and all\uc0\u8208 powerful\
Church. So be it, so be it! Even though at the end of the ages, for it is\
ordained to come to pass! And there is no need to be troubled about times\
and seasons, for the secret of the times and seasons is in the wisdom of\
God, in His foresight, and His love. And what in human reckoning seems\
still afar off, may by the Divine ordinance be close at hand, on the eve\
of its appearance. And so be it, so be it!\'94\
\
\'93So be it, so be it!\'94 Father Pa\'efssy repeated austerely and reverently.\
\
\'93Strange, extremely strange!\'94 Mi\'fcsov pronounced, not so much with heat as\
with latent indignation.\
\
\'93What strikes you as so strange?\'94 Father Iosif inquired cautiously.\
\
\'93Why, it\'92s beyond anything!\'94 cried Mi\'fcsov, suddenly breaking out; \'93the\
State is eliminated and the Church is raised to the position of the State.\
It\'92s not simply Ultramontanism, it\'92s arch\uc0\u8208 Ultramontanism! It\'92s beyond the\
dreams of Pope Gregory the Seventh!\'94\
\
\'93You are completely misunderstanding it,\'94 said Father Pa\'efssy sternly.\
\'93Understand, the Church is not to be transformed into the State. That is\
Rome and its dream. That is the third temptation of the devil. On the\
contrary, the State is transformed into the Church, will ascend and become\
a Church over the whole world\'97which is the complete opposite of\
Ultramontanism and Rome, and your interpretation, and is only the glorious\
destiny ordained for the Orthodox Church. This star will arise in the\
east!\'94\
\
Mi\'fcsov was significantly silent. His whole figure expressed extraordinary\
personal dignity. A supercilious and condescending smile played on his\
lips. Alyosha watched it all with a throbbing heart. The whole\
conversation stirred him profoundly. He glanced casually at Rakitin, who\
was standing immovable in his place by the door listening and watching\
intently though with downcast eyes. But from the color in his cheeks\
Alyosha guessed that Rakitin was probably no less excited, and he knew\
what caused his excitement.\
\
\'93Allow me to tell you one little anecdote, gentlemen,\'94 Mi\'fcsov said\
impressively, with a peculiarly majestic air. \'93Some years ago, soon after\
the _coup d\'92\'e9tat_ of December, I happened to be calling in Paris on an\
extremely influential personage in the Government, and I met a very\
interesting man in his house. This individual was not precisely a\
detective but was a sort of superintendent of a whole regiment of\
political detectives\'97a rather powerful position in its own way. I was\
prompted by curiosity to seize the opportunity of conversation with him.\
And as he had not come as a visitor but as a subordinate official bringing\
a special report, and as he saw the reception given me by his chief, he\
deigned to speak with some openness, to a certain extent only, of course.\
He was rather courteous than open, as Frenchmen know how to be courteous,\
especially to a foreigner. But I thoroughly understood him. The subject\
was the socialist revolutionaries who were at that time persecuted. I will\
quote only one most curious remark dropped by this person. \'91We are not\
particularly afraid,\'92 said he, \'91of all these socialists, anarchists,\
infidels, and revolutionists; we keep watch on them and know all their\
goings on. But there are a few peculiar men among them who believe in God\
and are Christians, but at the same time are socialists. These are the\
people we are most afraid of. They are dreadful people! The socialist who\
is a Christian is more to be dreaded than a socialist who is an atheist.\'92\
The words struck me at the time, and now they have suddenly come back to\
me here, gentlemen.\'94\
\
\'93You apply them to us, and look upon us as socialists?\'94 Father Pa\'efssy\
asked directly, without beating about the bush.\
\
But before Pyotr Alexandrovitch could think what to answer, the door\
opened, and the guest so long expected, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, came in. They\
had, in fact, given up expecting him, and his sudden appearance caused\
some surprise for a moment.\
\
\
\
Chapter VI. Why Is Such A Man Alive?\
\
\
Dmitri Fyodorovitch, a young man of eight and twenty, of medium height and\
agreeable countenance, looked older than his years. He was muscular, and\
showed signs of considerable physical strength. Yet there was something\
not healthy in his face. It was rather thin, his cheeks were hollow, and\
there was an unhealthy sallowness in their color. His rather large,\
prominent, dark eyes had an expression of firm determination, and yet\
there was a vague look in them, too. Even when he was excited and talking\
irritably, his eyes somehow did not follow his mood, but betrayed\
something else, sometimes quite incongruous with what was passing. \'93It\'92s\
hard to tell what he\'92s thinking,\'94 those who talked to him sometimes\
declared. People who saw something pensive and sullen in his eyes were\
startled by his sudden laugh, which bore witness to mirthful and light\uc0\u8208 \
hearted thoughts at the very time when his eyes were so gloomy. A certain\
strained look in his face was easy to understand at this moment. Every one\
knew, or had heard of, the extremely restless and dissipated life which he\
had been leading of late, as well as of the violent anger to which he had\
been roused in his quarrels with his father. There were several stories\
current in the town about it. It is true that he was irascible by nature,\
\'93of an unstable and unbalanced mind,\'94 as our justice of the peace,\
Katchalnikov, happily described him.\
\
He was stylishly and irreproachably dressed in a carefully buttoned frock\uc0\u8208 \
coat. He wore black gloves and carried a top\uc0\u8208 hat. Having only lately left\
the army, he still had mustaches and no beard. His dark brown hair was\
cropped short, and combed forward on his temples. He had the long,\
determined stride of a military man. He stood still for a moment on the\
threshold, and glancing at the whole party went straight up to the elder,\
guessing him to be their host. He made him a low bow, and asked his\
blessing. Father Zossima, rising in his chair, blessed him. Dmitri kissed\
his hand respectfully, and with intense feeling, almost anger, he said:\
\
\'93Be so generous as to forgive me for having kept you waiting so long, but\
Smerdyakov, the valet sent me by my father, in reply to my inquiries, told\
me twice over that the appointment was for one. Now I suddenly learn\'97\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t disturb yourself,\'94 interposed the elder. \'93No matter. You are a\
little late. It\'92s of no consequence....\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m extremely obliged to you, and expected no less from your goodness.\'94\
\
Saying this, Dmitri bowed once more. Then, turning suddenly towards his\
father, made him, too, a similarly low and respectful bow. He had\
evidently considered it beforehand, and made this bow in all seriousness,\
thinking it his duty to show his respect and good intentions.\
\
Although Fyodor Pavlovitch was taken unawares, he was equal to the\
occasion. In response to Dmitri\'92s bow he jumped up from his chair and made\
his son a bow as low in return. His face was suddenly solemn and\
impressive, which gave him a positively malignant look. Dmitri bowed\
generally to all present, and without a word walked to the window with his\
long, resolute stride, sat down on the only empty chair, near Father\
Pa\'efssy, and, bending forward, prepared to listen to the conversation he\
had interrupted.\
\
Dmitri\'92s entrance had taken no more than two minutes, and the conversation\
was resumed. But this time Mi\'fcsov thought it unnecessary to reply to\
Father Pa\'efssy\'92s persistent and almost irritable question.\
\
\'93Allow me to withdraw from this discussion,\'94 he observed with a certain\
well\uc0\u8208 bred nonchalance. \'93It\'92s a subtle question, too. Here Ivan\
Fyodorovitch is smiling at us. He must have something interesting to say\
about that also. Ask him.\'94\
\
\'93Nothing special, except one little remark,\'94 Ivan replied at once.\
\'93European Liberals in general, and even our liberal dilettanti, often mix\
up the final results of socialism with those of Christianity. This wild\
notion is, of course, a characteristic feature. But it\'92s not only Liberals\
and dilettanti who mix up socialism and Christianity, but, in many cases,\
it appears, the police\'97the foreign police, of course\'97do the same. Your\
Paris anecdote is rather to the point, Pyotr Alexandrovitch.\'94\
\
\'93I ask your permission to drop this subject altogether,\'94 Mi\'fcsov repeated.\
\'93I will tell you instead, gentlemen, another interesting and rather\
characteristic anecdote of Ivan Fyodorovitch himself. Only five days ago,\
in a gathering here, principally of ladies, he solemnly declared in\
argument that there was nothing in the whole world to make men love their\
neighbors. That there was no law of nature that man should love mankind,\
and that, if there had been any love on earth hitherto, it was not owing\
to a natural law, but simply because men have believed in immortality.\
Ivan Fyodorovitch added in parenthesis that the whole natural law lies in\
that faith, and that if you were to destroy in mankind the belief in\
immortality, not only love but every living force maintaining the life of\
the world would at once be dried up. Moreover, nothing then would be\
immoral, everything would be lawful, even cannibalism. That\'92s not all. He\
ended by asserting that for every individual, like ourselves, who does not\
believe in God or immortality, the moral law of nature must immediately be\
changed into the exact contrary of the former religious law, and that\
egoism, even to crime, must become not only lawful but even recognized as\
the inevitable, the most rational, even honorable outcome of his position.\
From this paradox, gentlemen, you can judge of the rest of our eccentric\
and paradoxical friend Ivan Fyodorovitch\'92s theories.\'94\
\
\'93Excuse me,\'94 Dmitri cried suddenly; \'93if I\'92ve heard aright, crime must not\
only be permitted but even recognized as the inevitable and the most\
rational outcome of his position for every infidel! Is that so or not?\'94\
\
\'93Quite so,\'94 said Father Pa\'efssy.\
\
\'93I\'92ll remember it.\'94\
\
Having uttered these words Dmitri ceased speaking as suddenly as he had\
begun. Every one looked at him with curiosity.\
\
\'93Is that really your conviction as to the consequences of the\
disappearance of the faith in immortality?\'94 the elder asked Ivan suddenly.\
\
\'93Yes. That was my contention. There is no virtue if there is no\
immortality.\'94\
\
\'93You are blessed in believing that, or else most unhappy.\'94\
\
\'93Why unhappy?\'94 Ivan asked smiling.\
\
\'93Because, in all probability you don\'92t believe yourself in the immortality\
of your soul, nor in what you have written yourself in your article on\
Church jurisdiction.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps you are right! ... But I wasn\'92t altogether joking,\'94 Ivan suddenly\
and strangely confessed, flushing quickly.\
\
\'93You were not altogether joking. That\'92s true. The question is still\
fretting your heart, and not answered. But the martyr likes sometimes to\
divert himself with his despair, as it were driven to it by despair\
itself. Meanwhile, in your despair, you, too, divert yourself with\
magazine articles, and discussions in society, though you don\'92t believe\
your own arguments, and with an aching heart mock at them inwardly....\
That question you have not answered, and it is your great grief, for it\
clamors for an answer.\'94\
\
\'93But can it be answered by me? Answered in the affirmative?\'94 Ivan went on\
asking strangely, still looking at the elder with the same inexplicable\
smile.\
\
\'93If it can\'92t be decided in the affirmative, it will never be decided in\
the negative. You know that that is the peculiarity of your heart, and all\
its suffering is due to it. But thank the Creator who has given you a\
lofty heart capable of such suffering; of thinking and seeking higher\
things, for our dwelling is in the heavens. God grant that your heart will\
attain the answer on earth, and may God bless your path.\'94\
\
The elder raised his hand and would have made the sign of the cross over\
Ivan from where he stood. But the latter rose from his seat, went up to\
him, received his blessing, and kissing his hand went back to his place in\
silence. His face looked firm and earnest. This action and all the\
preceding conversation, which was so surprising from Ivan, impressed every\
one by its strangeness and a certain solemnity, so that all were silent\
for a moment, and there was a look almost of apprehension in Alyosha\'92s\
face. But Mi\'fcsov suddenly shrugged his shoulders. And at the same moment\
Fyodor Pavlovitch jumped up from his seat.\
\
\'93Most pious and holy elder,\'94 he cried, pointing to Ivan, \'93that is my son,\
flesh of my flesh, the dearest of my flesh! He is my most dutiful Karl\
Moor, so to speak, while this son who has just come in, Dmitri, against\
whom I am seeking justice from you, is the undutiful Franz Moor\'97they are\
both out of Schiller\'92s _Robbers_, and so I am the reigning Count von Moor!\
Judge and save us! We need not only your prayers but your prophecies!\'94\
\
\'93Speak without buffoonery, and don\'92t begin by insulting the members of\
your family,\'94 answered the elder, in a faint, exhausted voice. He was\
obviously getting more and more fatigued, and his strength was failing.\
\
\'93An unseemly farce which I foresaw when I came here!\'94 cried Dmitri\
indignantly. He too leapt up. \'93Forgive it, reverend Father,\'94 he added,\
addressing the elder. \'93I am not a cultivated man, and I don\'92t even know\
how to address you properly, but you have been deceived and you have been\
too good\uc0\u8208 natured in letting us meet here. All my father wants is a\
scandal. Why he wants it only he can tell. He always has some motive. But\
I believe I know why\'97\'94\
\
\'93They all blame me, all of them!\'94 cried Fyodor Pavlovitch in his turn.\
\'93Pyotr Alexandrovitch here blames me too. You have been blaming me, Pyotr\
Alexandrovitch, you have!\'94 he turned suddenly to Mi\'fcsov, although the\
latter was not dreaming of interrupting him. \'93They all accuse me of having\
hidden the children\'92s money in my boots, and cheated them, but isn\'92t there\
a court of law? There they will reckon out for you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\
from your notes, your letters, and your agreements, how much money you\
had, how much you have spent, and how much you have left. Why does Pyotr\
Alexandrovitch refuse to pass judgment? Dmitri is not a stranger to him.\
Because they are all against me, while Dmitri Fyodorovitch is in debt to\
me, and not a little, but some thousands of which I have documentary\
proof. The whole town is echoing with his debaucheries. And where he was\
stationed before, he several times spent a thousand or two for the\
seduction of some respectable girl; we know all about that, Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch, in its most secret details. I\'92ll prove it.... Would you\
believe it, holy Father, he has captivated the heart of the most honorable\
of young ladies of good family and fortune, daughter of a gallant colonel,\
formerly his superior officer, who had received many honors and had the\
Anna Order on his breast. He compromised the girl by his promise of\
marriage, now she is an orphan and here; she is betrothed to him, yet\
before her very eyes he is dancing attendance on a certain enchantress.\
And although this enchantress has lived in, so to speak, civil marriage\
with a respectable man, yet she is of an independent character, an\
unapproachable fortress for everybody, just like a legal wife\'97for she is\
virtuous, yes, holy Fathers, she is virtuous. Dmitri Fyodorovitch wants to\
open this fortress with a golden key, and that\'92s why he is insolent to me\
now, trying to get money from me, though he has wasted thousands on this\
enchantress already. He\'92s continually borrowing money for the purpose.\
From whom do you think? Shall I say, Mitya?\'94\
\
\'93Be silent!\'94 cried Dmitri, \'93wait till I\'92m gone. Don\'92t dare in my presence\
to asperse the good name of an honorable girl! That you should utter a\
word about her is an outrage, and I won\'92t permit it!\'94\
\
He was breathless.\
\
\'93Mitya! Mitya!\'94 cried Fyodor Pavlovitch hysterically, squeezing out a\
tear. \'93And is your father\'92s blessing nothing to you? If I curse you, what\
then?\'94\
\
\'93Shameless hypocrite!\'94 exclaimed Dmitri furiously.\
\
\'93He says that to his father! his father! What would he be with others?\
Gentlemen, only fancy; there\'92s a poor but honorable man living here,\
burdened with a numerous family, a captain who got into trouble and was\
discharged from the army, but not publicly, not by court\uc0\u8208 martial, with no\
slur on his honor. And three weeks ago, Dmitri seized him by the beard in\
a tavern, dragged him out into the street and beat him publicly, and all\
because he is an agent in a little business of mine.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s all a lie! Outwardly it\'92s the truth, but inwardly a lie!\'94 Dmitri was\
trembling with rage. \'93Father, I don\'92t justify my action. Yes, I confess it\
publicly, I behaved like a brute to that captain, and I regret it now, and\
I\'92m disgusted with myself for my brutal rage. But this captain, this agent\
of yours, went to that lady whom you call an enchantress, and suggested to\
her from you, that she should take I.O.U.\'92s of mine which were in your\
possession, and should sue me for the money so as to get me into prison by\
means of them, if I persisted in claiming an account from you of my\
property. Now you reproach me for having a weakness for that lady when you\
yourself incited her to captivate me! She told me so to my face.... She\
told me the story and laughed at you.... You wanted to put me in prison\
because you are jealous of me with her, because you\'92d begun to force your\
attentions upon her; and I know all about that, too; she laughed at you\
for that as well\'97you hear\'97she laughed at you as she described it. So here\
you have this man, this father who reproaches his profligate son!\
Gentlemen, forgive my anger, but I foresaw that this crafty old man would\
only bring you together to create a scandal. I had come to forgive him if\
he held out his hand; to forgive him, and ask forgiveness! But as he has\
just this minute insulted not only me, but an honorable young lady, for\
whom I feel such reverence that I dare not take her name in vain, I have\
made up my mind to show up his game, though he is my father....\'94\
\
He could not go on. His eyes were glittering and he breathed with\
difficulty. But every one in the cell was stirred. All except Father\
Zossima got up from their seats uneasily. The monks looked austere but\
waited for guidance from the elder. He sat still, pale, not from\
excitement but from the weakness of disease. An imploring smile lighted up\
his face; from time to time he raised his hand, as though to check the\
storm, and, of course, a gesture from him would have been enough to end\
the scene; but he seemed to be waiting for something and watched them\
intently as though trying to make out something which was not perfectly\
clear to him. At last Mi\'fcsov felt completely humiliated and disgraced.\
\
\'93We are all to blame for this scandalous scene,\'94 he said hotly. \'93But I did\
not foresee it when I came, though I knew with whom I had to deal. This\
must be stopped at once! Believe me, your reverence, I had no precise\
knowledge of the details that have just come to light, I was unwilling to\
believe them, and I learn for the first time.... A father is jealous of\
his son\'92s relations with a woman of loose behavior and intrigues with the\
creature to get his son into prison! This is the company in which I have\
been forced to be present! I was deceived. I declare to you all that I was\
as much deceived as any one.\'94\
\
\'93Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94 yelled Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly, in an unnatural\
voice, \'93if you were not my son I would challenge you this instant to a\
duel ... with pistols, at three paces ... across a handkerchief,\'94 he\
ended, stamping with both feet.\
\
With old liars who have been acting all their lives there are moments when\
they enter so completely into their part that they tremble or shed tears\
of emotion in earnest, although at that very moment, or a second later,\
they are able to whisper to themselves, \'93You know you are lying, you\
shameless old sinner! You\'92re acting now, in spite of your \'91holy\'92 wrath.\'94\
\
Dmitri frowned painfully, and looked with unutterable contempt at his\
father.\
\
\'93I thought ... I thought,\'94 he said, in a soft and, as it were, controlled\
voice, \'93that I was coming to my native place with the angel of my heart,\
my betrothed, to cherish his old age, and I find nothing but a depraved\
profligate, a despicable clown!\'94\
\
\'93A duel!\'94 yelled the old wretch again, breathless and spluttering at each\
syllable. \'93And you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch Mi\'fcsov, let me tell you that\
there has never been in all your family a loftier, and more honest\'97you\
hear\'97more honest woman than this \'91creature,\'92 as you have dared to call\
her! And you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, have abandoned your betrothed for that\
\'91creature,\'92 so you must yourself have thought that your betrothed couldn\'92t\
hold a candle to her. That\'92s the woman called a \'91creature\'92!\'94\
\
\'93Shameful!\'94 broke from Father Iosif.\
\
\'93Shameful and disgraceful!\'94 Kalganov, flushing crimson, cried in a boyish\
voice, trembling with emotion. He had been silent till that moment.\
\
\'93Why is such a man alive?\'94 Dmitri, beside himself with rage, growled in a\
hollow voice, hunching up his shoulders till he looked almost deformed.\
\'93Tell me, can he be allowed to go on defiling the earth?\'94 He looked round\
at every one and pointed at the old man. He spoke evenly and deliberately.\
\
\'93Listen, listen, monks, to the parricide!\'94 cried Fyodor Pavlovitch,\
rushing up to Father Iosif. \'93That\'92s the answer to your \'91shameful!\'92 What is\
shameful? That \'91creature,\'92 that \'91woman of loose behavior\'92 is perhaps\
holier than you are yourselves, you monks who are seeking salvation! She\
fell perhaps in her youth, ruined by her environment. But she loved much,\
and Christ himself forgave the woman \'91who loved much.\'92 \'94\
\
\'93It was not for such love Christ forgave her,\'94 broke impatiently from the\
gentle Father Iosif.\
\
\'93Yes, it was for such, monks, it was! You save your souls here, eating\
cabbage, and think you are the righteous. You eat a gudgeon a day, and you\
think you bribe God with gudgeon.\'94\
\
\'93This is unendurable!\'94 was heard on all sides in the cell.\
\
But this unseemly scene was cut short in a most unexpected way. Father\
Zossima rose suddenly from his seat. Almost distracted with anxiety for\
the elder and every one else, Alyosha succeeded, however, in supporting\
him by the arm. Father Zossima moved towards Dmitri and reaching him sank\
on his knees before him. Alyosha thought that he had fallen from weakness,\
but this was not so. The elder distinctly and deliberately bowed down at\
Dmitri\'92s feet till his forehead touched the floor. Alyosha was so\
astounded that he failed to assist him when he got up again. There was a\
faint smile on his lips.\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by! Forgive me, all of you!\'94 he said, bowing on all sides to his\
guests.\
\
Dmitri stood for a few moments in amazement. Bowing down to him\'97what did\
it mean? Suddenly he cried aloud, \'93Oh, God!\'94 hid his face in his hands,\
and rushed out of the room. All the guests flocked out after him, in their\
confusion not saying good\uc0\u8208 by, or bowing to their host. Only the monks went\
up to him again for a blessing.\
\
\'93What did it mean, falling at his feet like that? Was it symbolic or\
what?\'94 said Fyodor Pavlovitch, suddenly quieted and trying to reopen\
conversation without venturing to address anybody in particular. They were\
all passing out of the precincts of the hermitage at the moment.\
\
\'93I can\'92t answer for a madhouse and for madmen,\'94 Mi\'fcsov answered at once\
ill\uc0\u8208 humoredly, \'93but I will spare myself your company, Fyodor Pavlovitch,\
and, trust me, for ever. Where\'92s that monk?\'94\
\
\'93That monk,\'94 that is, the monk who had invited them to dine with the\
Superior, did not keep them waiting. He met them as soon as they came down\
the steps from the elder\'92s cell, as though he had been waiting for them\
all the time.\
\
\'93Reverend Father, kindly do me a favor. Convey my deepest respect to the\
Father Superior, apologize for me, personally, Mi\'fcsov, to his reverence,\
telling him that I deeply regret that owing to unforeseen circumstances I\
am unable to have the honor of being present at his table, greatly as I\
should desire to do so,\'94 Mi\'fcsov said irritably to the monk.\
\
\'93And that unforeseen circumstance, of course, is myself,\'94 Fyodor\
Pavlovitch cut in immediately. \'93Do you hear, Father; this gentleman\
doesn\'92t want to remain in my company or else he\'92d come at once. And you\
shall go, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, pray go to the Father Superior and good\
appetite to you. I will decline, and not you. Home, home, I\'92ll eat at\
home, I don\'92t feel equal to it here, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, my amiable\
relative.\'94\
\
\'93I am not your relative and never have been, you contemptible man!\'94\
\
\'93I said it on purpose to madden you, because you always disclaim the\
relationship, though you really are a relation in spite of your shuffling.\
I\'92ll prove it by the church calendar. As for you, Ivan, stay if you like.\
I\'92ll send the horses for you later. Propriety requires you to go to the\
Father Superior, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, to apologize for the disturbance\
we\'92ve been making....\'94\
\
\'93Is it true that you are going home? Aren\'92t you lying?\'94\
\
\'93Pyotr Alexandrovitch! How could I dare after what\'92s happened! Forgive me,\
gentlemen, I was carried away! And upset besides! And, indeed, I am\
ashamed. Gentlemen, one man has the heart of Alexander of Macedon and\
another the heart of the little dog Fido. Mine is that of the little dog\
Fido. I am ashamed! After such an escapade how can I go to dinner, to\
gobble up the monastery\'92s sauces? I am ashamed, I can\'92t. You must excuse\
me!\'94\
\
\'93The devil only knows, what if he deceives us?\'94 thought Mi\'fcsov, still\
hesitating, and watching the retreating buffoon with distrustful eyes. The\
latter turned round, and noticing that Mi\'fcsov was watching him, waved him\
a kiss.\
\
\'93Well, are you coming to the Superior?\'94 Mi\'fcsov asked Ivan abruptly.\
\
\'93Why not? I was especially invited yesterday.\'94\
\
\'93Unfortunately I feel myself compelled to go to this confounded dinner,\'94\
said Mi\'fcsov with the same irritability, regardless of the fact that the\
monk was listening. \'93We ought, at least, to apologize for the disturbance,\
and explain that it was not our doing. What do you think?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, we must explain that it wasn\'92t our doing. Besides, father won\'92t be\
there,\'94 observed Ivan.\
\
\'93Well, I should hope not! Confound this dinner!\'94\
\
They all walked on, however. The monk listened in silence. On the road\
through the copse he made one observation however\'97that the Father Superior\
had been waiting a long time, and that they were more than half an hour\
late. He received no answer. Mi\'fcsov looked with hatred at Ivan.\
\
\'93Here he is, going to the dinner as though nothing had happened,\'94 he\
thought. \'93A brazen face, and the conscience of a Karamazov!\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter VII. A Young Man Bent On A Career\
\
\
Alyosha helped Father Zossima to his bedroom and seated him on his bed. It\
was a little room furnished with the bare necessities. There was a narrow\
iron bedstead, with a strip of felt for a mattress. In the corner, under\
the ikons, was a reading\uc0\u8208 desk with a cross and the Gospel lying on it. The\
elder sank exhausted on the bed. His eyes glittered and he breathed hard.\
He looked intently at Alyosha, as though considering something.\
\
\'93Go, my dear boy, go. Porfiry is enough for me. Make haste, you are needed\
there, go and wait at the Father Superior\'92s table.\'94\
\
\'93Let me stay here,\'94 Alyosha entreated.\
\
\'93You are more needed there. There is no peace there. You will wait, and be\
of service. If evil spirits rise up, repeat a prayer. And remember, my\
son\'94\'97the elder liked to call him that\'97\'93this is not the place for you in\
the future. When it is God\'92s will to call me, leave the monastery. Go away\
for good.\'94\
\
Alyosha started.\
\
\'93What is it? This is not your place for the time. I bless you for great\
service in the world. Yours will be a long pilgrimage. And you will have\
to take a wife, too. You will have to bear _all_ before you come back.\
There will be much to do. But I don\'92t doubt of you, and so I send you\
forth. Christ is with you. Do not abandon Him and He will not abandon you.\
You will see great sorrow, and in that sorrow you will be happy. This is\
my last message to you: in sorrow seek happiness. Work, work unceasingly.\
Remember my words, for although I shall talk with you again, not only my\
days but my hours are numbered.\'94\
\
Alyosha\'92s face again betrayed strong emotion. The corners of his mouth\
quivered.\
\
\'93What is it again?\'94 Father Zossima asked, smiling gently. \'93The worldly may\
follow the dead with tears, but here we rejoice over the father who is\
departing. We rejoice and pray for him. Leave me, I must pray. Go, and\
make haste. Be near your brothers. And not near one only, but near both.\'94\
\
Father Zossima raised his hand to bless him. Alyosha could make no\
protest, though he had a great longing to remain. He longed, moreover, to\
ask the significance of his bowing to Dmitri, the question was on the tip\
of his tongue, but he dared not ask it. He knew that the elder would have\
explained it unasked if he had thought fit. But evidently it was not his\
will. That action had made a terrible impression on Alyosha; he believed\
blindly in its mysterious significance. Mysterious, and perhaps awful.\
\
As he hastened out of the hermitage precincts to reach the monastery in\
time to serve at the Father Superior\'92s dinner, he felt a sudden pang at\
his heart, and stopped short. He seemed to hear again Father Zossima\'92s\
words, foretelling his approaching end. What he had foretold so exactly\
must infallibly come to pass. Alyosha believed that implicitly. But how\
could he be left without him? How could he live without seeing and hearing\
him? Where should he go? He had told him not to weep, and to leave the\
monastery. Good God! It was long since Alyosha had known such anguish. He\
hurried through the copse that divided the monastery from the hermitage,\
and unable to bear the burden of his thoughts, he gazed at the ancient\
pines beside the path. He had not far to go\'97about five hundred paces. He\
expected to meet no one at that hour, but at the first turn of the path he\
noticed Rakitin. He was waiting for some one.\
\
\'93Are you waiting for me?\'94 asked Alyosha, overtaking him.\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 grinned Rakitin. \'93You are hurrying to the Father Superior, I know;\
he has a banquet. There\'92s not been such a banquet since the Superior\
entertained the Bishop and General Pahatov, do you remember? I shan\'92t be\
there, but you go and hand the sauces. Tell me one thing, Alexey, what\
does that vision mean? That\'92s what I want to ask you.\'94\
\
\'93What vision?\'94\
\
\'93That bowing to your brother, Dmitri. And didn\'92t he tap the ground with\
his forehead, too!\'94\
\
\'93You speak of Father Zossima?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, of Father Zossima.\'94\
\
\'93Tapped the ground?\'94\
\
\'93Ah, an irreverent expression! Well, what of it? Anyway, what does that\
vision mean?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know what it means, Misha.\'94\
\
\'93I knew he wouldn\'92t explain it to you! There\'92s nothing wonderful about it,\
of course, only the usual holy mummery. But there was an object in the\
performance. All the pious people in the town will talk about it and\
spread the story through the province, wondering what it meant. To my\
thinking the old man really has a keen nose; he sniffed a crime. Your\
house stinks of it.\'94\
\
\'93What crime?\'94\
\
Rakitin evidently had something he was eager to speak of.\
\
\'93It\'92ll be in your family, this crime. Between your brothers and your rich\
old father. So Father Zossima flopped down to be ready for what may turn\
up. If something happens later on, it\'92ll be: \'91Ah, the holy man foresaw it,\
prophesied it!\'92 though it\'92s a poor sort of prophecy, flopping like that.\
\'91Ah, but it was symbolic,\'92 they\'92ll say, \'91an allegory,\'92 and the devil knows\
what all! It\'92ll be remembered to his glory: \'91He predicted the crime and\
marked the criminal!\'92 That\'92s always the way with these crazy fanatics;\
they cross themselves at the tavern and throw stones at the temple. Like\
your elder, he takes a stick to a just man and falls at the feet of a\
murderer.\'94\
\
\'93What crime? What murderer? What do you mean?\'94\
\
Alyosha stopped dead. Rakitin stopped, too.\
\
\'93What murderer? As though you didn\'92t know! I\'92ll bet you\'92ve thought of it\
before. That\'92s interesting, too, by the way. Listen, Alyosha, you always\
speak the truth, though you\'92re always between two stools. Have you thought\
of it or not? Answer.\'94\
\
\'93I have,\'94 answered Alyosha in a low voice. Even Rakitin was taken aback.\
\
\'93What? Have you really?\'94 he cried.\
\
\'93I ... I\'92ve not exactly thought it,\'94 muttered Alyosha, \'93but directly you\
began speaking so strangely, I fancied I had thought of it myself.\'94\
\
\'93You see? (And how well you expressed it!) Looking at your father and your\
brother Mitya to\uc0\u8208 day you thought of a crime. Then I\'92m not mistaken?\'94\
\
\'93But wait, wait a minute,\'94 Alyosha broke in uneasily. \'93What has led you to\
see all this? Why does it interest you? That\'92s the first question.\'94\
\
\'93Two questions, disconnected, but natural. I\'92ll deal with them separately.\
What led me to see it? I shouldn\'92t have seen it, if I hadn\'92t suddenly\
understood your brother Dmitri, seen right into the very heart of him all\
at once. I caught the whole man from one trait. These very honest but\
passionate people have a line which mustn\'92t be crossed. If it were, he\'92d\
run at your father with a knife. But your father\'92s a drunken and abandoned\
old sinner, who can never draw the line\'97if they both let themselves go,\
they\'92ll both come to grief.\'94\
\
\'93No, Misha, no. If that\'92s all, you\'92ve reassured me. It won\'92t come to\
that.\'94\
\
\'93But why are you trembling? Let me tell you; he may be honest, our Mitya\
(he is stupid, but honest), but he\'92s\'97a sensualist. That\'92s the very\
definition and inner essence of him. It\'92s your father has handed him on\
his low sensuality. Do you know, I simply wonder at you, Alyosha, how you\
can have kept your purity. You\'92re a Karamazov too, you know! In your\
family sensuality is carried to a disease. But now, these three\
sensualists are watching one another, with their knives in their belts.\
The three of them are knocking their heads together, and you may be the\
fourth.\'94\
\
\'93You are mistaken about that woman. Dmitri\'97despises her,\'94 said Alyosha,\
with a sort of shudder.\
\
\'93Grushenka? No, brother, he doesn\'92t despise her. Since he has openly\
abandoned his betrothed for her, he doesn\'92t despise her. There\'92s something\
here, my dear boy, that you don\'92t understand yet. A man will fall in love\
with some beauty, with a woman\'92s body, or even with a part of a woman\'92s\
body (a sensualist can understand that), and he\'92ll abandon his own\
children for her, sell his father and mother, and his country, Russia,\
too. If he\'92s honest, he\'92ll steal; if he\'92s humane, he\'92ll murder; if he\'92s\
faithful, he\'92ll deceive. Pushkin, the poet of women\'92s feet, sung of their\
feet in his verse. Others don\'92t sing their praises, but they can\'92t look at\
their feet without a thrill\'97and it\'92s not only their feet. Contempt\'92s no\
help here, brother, even if he did despise Grushenka. He does, but he\
can\'92t tear himself away.\'94\
\
\'93I understand that,\'94 Alyosha jerked out suddenly.\
\
\'93Really? Well, I dare say you do understand, since you blurt it out at the\
first word,\'94 said Rakitin, malignantly. \'93That escaped you unawares, and\
the confession\'92s the more precious. So it\'92s a familiar subject; you\'92ve\
thought about it already, about sensuality, I mean! Oh, you virgin soul!\
You\'92re a quiet one, Alyosha, you\'92re a saint, I know, but the devil only\
knows what you\'92ve thought about, and what you know already! You are pure,\
but you\'92ve been down into the depths.... I\'92ve been watching you a long\
time. You\'92re a Karamazov yourself; you\'92re a thorough Karamazov\'97no doubt\
birth and selection have something to answer for. You\'92re a sensualist from\
your father, a crazy saint from your mother. Why do you tremble? Is it\
true, then? Do you know, Grushenka has been begging me to bring you along.\
\'91I\'92ll pull off his cassock,\'92 she says. You can\'92t think how she keeps\
begging me to bring you. I wondered why she took such an interest in you.\
Do you know, she\'92s an extraordinary woman, too!\'94\
\
\'93Thank her and say I\'92m not coming,\'94 said Alyosha, with a strained smile.\
\'93Finish what you were saying, Misha. I\'92ll tell you my idea after.\'94\
\
\'93There\'92s nothing to finish. It\'92s all clear. It\'92s the same old tune,\
brother. If even you are a sensualist at heart, what of your brother,\
Ivan? He\'92s a Karamazov, too. What is at the root of all you Karamazovs is\
that you\'92re all sensual, grasping and crazy! Your brother Ivan writes\
theological articles in joke, for some idiotic, unknown motive of his own,\
though he\'92s an atheist, and he admits it\'92s a fraud himself\'97that\'92s your\
brother Ivan. He\'92s trying to get Mitya\'92s betrothed for himself, and I\
fancy he\'92ll succeed, too. And what\'92s more, it\'92s with Mitya\'92s consent. For\
Mitya will surrender his betrothed to him to be rid of her, and escape to\
Grushenka. And he\'92s ready to do that in spite of all his nobility and\
disinterestedness. Observe that. Those are the most fatal people! Who the\
devil can make you out? He recognizes his vileness and goes on with it!\
Let me tell you, too, the old man, your father, is standing in Mitya\'92s way\
now. He has suddenly gone crazy over Grushenka. His mouth waters at the\
sight of her. It\'92s simply on her account he made that scene in the cell\
just now, simply because Mi\'fcsov called her an \'91abandoned creature.\'92 He\'92s\
worse than a tom\uc0\u8208 cat in love. At first she was only employed by him in\
connection with his taverns and in some other shady business, but now he\
has suddenly realized all she is and has gone wild about her. He keeps\
pestering her with his offers, not honorable ones, of course. And they\'92ll\
come into collision, the precious father and son, on that path! But\
Grushenka favors neither of them, she\'92s still playing with them, and\
teasing them both, considering which she can get most out of. For though\
she could filch a lot of money from the papa he wouldn\'92t marry her, and\
maybe he\'92ll turn stingy in the end, and keep his purse shut. That\'92s where\
Mitya\'92s value comes in; he has no money, but he\'92s ready to marry her. Yes,\
ready to marry her! to abandon his betrothed, a rare beauty, Katerina\
Ivanovna, who\'92s rich, and the daughter of a colonel, and to marry\
Grushenka, who has been the mistress of a dissolute old merchant,\
Samsonov, a coarse, uneducated, provincial mayor. Some murderous conflict\
may well come to pass from all this, and that\'92s what your brother Ivan is\
waiting for. It would suit him down to the ground. He\'92ll carry off\
Katerina Ivanovna, for whom he is languishing, and pocket her dowry of\
sixty thousand. That\'92s very alluring to start with, for a man of no\
consequence and a beggar. And, take note, he won\'92t be wronging Mitya, but\
doing him the greatest service. For I know as a fact that Mitya only last\
week, when he was with some gypsy girls drunk in a tavern, cried out aloud\
that he was unworthy of his betrothed, Katya, but that his brother Ivan,\
he was the man who deserved her. And Katerina Ivanovna will not in the end\
refuse such a fascinating man as Ivan. She\'92s hesitating between the two of\
them already. And how has that Ivan won you all, so that you all worship\
him? He is laughing at you, and enjoying himself at your expense.\'94\
\
\'93How do you know? How can you speak so confidently?\'94 Alyosha asked\
sharply, frowning.\
\
\'93Why do you ask, and are frightened at my answer? It shows that you know\
I\'92m speaking the truth.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t like Ivan. Ivan wouldn\'92t be tempted by money.\'94\
\
\'93Really? And the beauty of Katerina Ivanovna? It\'92s not only the money,\
though a fortune of sixty thousand is an attraction.\'94\
\
\'93Ivan is above that. He wouldn\'92t make up to any one for thousands. It is\
not money, it\'92s not comfort Ivan is seeking. Perhaps it\'92s suffering he is\
seeking.\'94\
\
\'93What wild dream now? Oh, you\'97aristocrats!\'94\
\
\'93Ah, Misha, he has a stormy spirit. His mind is in bondage. He is haunted\
by a great, unsolved doubt. He is one of those who don\'92t want millions,\
but an answer to their questions.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s plagiarism, Alyosha. You\'92re quoting your elder\'92s phrases. Ah, Ivan\
has set you a problem!\'94 cried Rakitin, with undisguised malice. His face\
changed, and his lips twitched. \'93And the problem\'92s a stupid one. It is no\
good guessing it. Rack your brains\'97you\'92ll understand it. His article is\
absurd and ridiculous. And did you hear his stupid theory just now: if\
there\'92s no immortality of the soul, then there\'92s no virtue, and everything\
is lawful. (And by the way, do you remember how your brother Mitya cried\
out: \'91I will remember!\'92) An attractive theory for scoundrels!\'97(I\'92m being\
abusive, that\'92s stupid.) Not for scoundrels, but for pedantic _poseurs_,\
\'91haunted by profound, unsolved doubts.\'92 He\'92s showing off, and what it all\
comes to is, \'91on the one hand we cannot but admit\'92 and \'91on the other it\
must be confessed!\'92 His whole theory is a fraud! Humanity will find in\
itself the power to live for virtue even without believing in immortality.\
It will find it in love for freedom, for equality, for fraternity.\'94\
\
Rakitin could hardly restrain himself in his heat, but, suddenly, as\
though remembering something, he stopped short.\
\
\'93Well, that\'92s enough,\'94 he said, with a still more crooked smile. \'93Why are\
you laughing? Do you think I\'92m a vulgar fool?\'94\
\
\'93No, I never dreamed of thinking you a vulgar fool. You are clever but ...\
never mind, I was silly to smile. I understand your getting hot about it,\
Misha. I guess from your warmth that you are not indifferent to Katerina\
Ivanovna yourself; I\'92ve suspected that for a long time, brother, that\'92s\
why you don\'92t like my brother Ivan. Are you jealous of him?\'94\
\
\'93And jealous of her money, too? Won\'92t you add that?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll say nothing about money. I am not going to insult you.\'94\
\
\'93I believe it, since you say so, but confound you, and your brother Ivan\
with you. Don\'92t you understand that one might very well dislike him, apart\
from Katerina Ivanovna. And why the devil should I like him? He\
condescends to abuse me, you know. Why haven\'92t I a right to abuse him?\'94\
\
\'93I never heard of his saying anything about you, good or bad. He doesn\'92t\
speak of you at all.\'94\
\
\'93But I heard that the day before yesterday at Katerina Ivanovna\'92s he was\
abusing me for all he was worth\'97you see what an interest he takes in your\
humble servant. And which is the jealous one after that, brother, I can\'92t\
say. He was so good as to express the opinion that, if I don\'92t go in for\
the career of an archimandrite in the immediate future and don\'92t become a\
monk, I shall be sure to go to Petersburg and get on to some solid\
magazine as a reviewer, that I shall write for the next ten years, and in\
the end become the owner of the magazine, and bring it out on the liberal\
and atheistic side, with a socialistic tinge, with a tiny gloss of\
socialism, but keeping a sharp look out all the time, that is, keeping in\
with both sides and hoodwinking the fools. According to your brother\'92s\
account, the tinge of socialism won\'92t hinder me from laying by the\
proceeds and investing them under the guidance of some Jew, till at the\
end of my career I build a great house in Petersburg and move my\
publishing offices to it, and let out the upper stories to lodgers. He has\
even chosen the place for it, near the new stone bridge across the Neva,\
which they say is to be built in Petersburg.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, Misha, that\'92s just what will really happen, every word of it,\'94 cried\
Alyosha, unable to restrain a good\uc0\u8208 humored smile.\
\
\'93You are pleased to be sarcastic, too, Alexey Fyodorovitch.\'94\
\
\'93No, no, I\'92m joking, forgive me. I\'92ve something quite different in my\
mind. But, excuse me, who can have told you all this? You can\'92t have been\
at Katerina Ivanovna\'92s yourself when he was talking about you?\'94\
\
\'93I wasn\'92t there, but Dmitri Fyodorovitch was; and I heard him tell it with\
my own ears; if you want to know, he didn\'92t tell me, but I overheard him,\
unintentionally, of course, for I was sitting in Grushenka\'92s bedroom and I\
couldn\'92t go away because Dmitri Fyodorovitch was in the next room.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, yes, I\'92d forgotten she was a relation of yours.\'94\
\
\'93A relation! That Grushenka a relation of mine!\'94 cried Rakitin, turning\
crimson. \'93Are you mad? You\'92re out of your mind!\'94\
\
\'93Why, isn\'92t she a relation of yours? I heard so.\'94\
\
\'93Where can you have heard it? You Karamazovs brag of being an ancient,\
noble family, though your father used to run about playing the buffoon at\
other men\'92s tables, and was only admitted to the kitchen as a favor. I may\
be only a priest\'92s son, and dirt in the eyes of noblemen like you, but\
don\'92t insult me so lightly and wantonly. I have a sense of honor, too,\
Alexey Fyodorovitch, I couldn\'92t be a relation of Grushenka, a common\
harlot. I beg you to understand that!\'94\
\
Rakitin was intensely irritated.\
\
\'93Forgive me, for goodness\'92 sake, I had no idea ... besides ... how can you\
call her a harlot? Is she ... that sort of woman?\'94 Alyosha flushed\
suddenly. \'93I tell you again, I heard that she was a relation of yours. You\
often go to see her, and you told me yourself you\'92re not her lover. I\
never dreamed that you of all people had such contempt for her! Does she\
really deserve it?\'94\
\
\'93I may have reasons of my own for visiting her. That\'92s not your business.\
But as for relationship, your brother, or even your father, is more likely\
to make her yours than mine. Well, here we are. You\'92d better go to the\
kitchen. Hullo! what\'92s wrong, what is it? Are we late? They can\'92t have\
finished dinner so soon! Have the Karamazovs been making trouble again? No\
doubt they have. Here\'92s your father and your brother Ivan after him.\
They\'92ve broken out from the Father Superior\'92s. And look, Father Isidor\'92s\
shouting out something after them from the steps. And your father\'92s\
shouting and waving his arms. I expect he\'92s swearing. Bah, and there goes\
Mi\'fcsov driving away in his carriage. You see, he\'92s going. And there\'92s old\
Maximov running!\'97there must have been a row. There can\'92t have been any\
dinner. Surely they\'92ve not been beating the Father Superior! Or have they,\
perhaps, been beaten? It would serve them right!\'94\
\
There was reason for Rakitin\'92s exclamations. There had been a scandalous,\
an unprecedented scene. It had all come from the impulse of a moment.\
\
\
\
Chapter VIII. The Scandalous Scene\
\
\
Mi\'fcsov, as a man of breeding and delicacy, could not but feel some inward\
qualms, when he reached the Father Superior\'92s with Ivan: he felt ashamed\
of having lost his temper. He felt that he ought to have disdained that\
despicable wretch, Fyodor Pavlovitch, too much to have been upset by him\
in Father Zossima\'92s cell, and so to have forgotten himself. \'93The monks\
were not to blame, in any case,\'94 he reflected, on the steps. \'93And if\
they\'92re decent people here (and the Father Superior, I understand, is a\
nobleman) why not be friendly and courteous with them? I won\'92t argue, I\'92ll\
fall in with everything, I\'92ll win them by politeness, and ... and ... show\
them that I\'92ve nothing to do with that \'c6sop, that buffoon, that Pierrot,\
and have merely been taken in over this affair, just as they have.\'94\
\
He determined to drop his litigation with the monastery, and relinquish\
his claims to the wood\uc0\u8208 cutting and fishery rights at once. He was the more\
ready to do this because the rights had become much less valuable, and he\
had indeed the vaguest idea where the wood and river in question were.\
\
These excellent intentions were strengthened when he entered the Father\
Superior\'92s dining\uc0\u8208 room, though, strictly speaking, it was not a dining\u8208 \
room, for the Father Superior had only two rooms altogether; they were,\
however, much larger and more comfortable than Father Zossima\'92s. But there\
was no great luxury about the furnishing of these rooms either. The\
furniture was of mahogany, covered with leather, in the old\uc0\u8208 fashioned\
style of 1820; the floor was not even stained, but everything was shining\
with cleanliness, and there were many choice flowers in the windows; the\
most sumptuous thing in the room at the moment was, of course, the\
beautifully decorated table. The cloth was clean, the service shone; there\
were three kinds of well\uc0\u8208 baked bread, two bottles of wine, two of\
excellent mead, and a large glass jug of kvas\'97both the latter made in the\
monastery, and famous in the neighborhood. There was no vodka. Rakitin\
related afterwards that there were five dishes: fish\uc0\u8208 soup made of\
sterlets, served with little fish patties; then boiled fish served in a\
special way; then salmon cutlets, ice pudding and compote, and finally,\
blanc\uc0\u8208 mange. Rakitin found out about all these good things, for he could\
not resist peeping into the kitchen, where he already had a footing. He\
had a footing everywhere, and got information about everything. He was of\
an uneasy and envious temper. He was well aware of his own considerable\
abilities, and nervously exaggerated them in his self\uc0\u8208 conceit. He knew he\
would play a prominent part of some sort, but Alyosha, who was attached to\
him, was distressed to see that his friend Rakitin was dishonorable, and\
quite unconscious of being so himself, considering, on the contrary, that\
because he would not steal money left on the table he was a man of the\
highest integrity. Neither Alyosha nor any one else could have influenced\
him in that.\
\
Rakitin, of course, was a person of too little consequence to be invited\
to the dinner, to which Father Iosif, Father Pa\'efssy, and one other monk\
were the only inmates of the monastery invited. They were already waiting\
when Mi\'fcsov, Kalganov, and Ivan arrived. The other guest, Maximov, stood a\
little aside, waiting also. The Father Superior stepped into the middle of\
the room to receive his guests. He was a tall, thin, but still vigorous\
old man, with black hair streaked with gray, and a long, grave, ascetic\
face. He bowed to his guests in silence. But this time they approached to\
receive his blessing. Mi\'fcsov even tried to kiss his hand, but the Father\
Superior drew it back in time to avoid the salute. But Ivan and Kalganov\
went through the ceremony in the most simple\uc0\u8208 hearted and complete manner,\
kissing his hand as peasants do.\
\
\'93We must apologize most humbly, your reverence,\'94 began Mi\'fcsov, simpering\
affably, and speaking in a dignified and respectful tone. \'93Pardon us for\
having come alone without the gentleman you invited, Fyodor Pavlovitch. He\
felt obliged to decline the honor of your hospitality, and not without\
reason. In the reverend Father Zossima\'92s cell he was carried away by the\
unhappy dissension with his son, and let fall words which were quite out\
of keeping ... in fact, quite unseemly ... as\'94\'97he glanced at the\
monks\'97\'93your reverence is, no doubt, already aware. And therefore,\
recognizing that he had been to blame, he felt sincere regret and shame,\
and begged me, and his son Ivan Fyodorovitch, to convey to you his\
apologies and regrets. In brief, he hopes and desires to make amends\
later. He asks your blessing, and begs you to forget what has taken\
place.\'94\
\
As he uttered the last word of his tirade, Mi\'fcsov completely recovered his\
self\uc0\u8208 complacency, and all traces of his former irritation disappeared. He\
fully and sincerely loved humanity again.\
\
The Father Superior listened to him with dignity, and, with a slight bend\
of the head, replied:\
\
\'93I sincerely deplore his absence. Perhaps at our table he might have\
learnt to like us, and we him. Pray be seated, gentlemen.\'94\
\
He stood before the holy image, and began to say grace, aloud. All bent\
their heads reverently, and Maximov clasped his hands before him, with\
peculiar fervor.\
\
It was at this moment that Fyodor Pavlovitch played his last prank. It\
must be noted that he really had meant to go home, and really had felt the\
impossibility of going to dine with the Father Superior as though nothing\
had happened, after his disgraceful behavior in the elder\'92s cell. Not that\
he was so very much ashamed of himself\'97quite the contrary perhaps. But\
still he felt it would be unseemly to go to dinner. Yet his creaking\
carriage had hardly been brought to the steps of the hotel, and he had\
hardly got into it, when he suddenly stopped short. He remembered his own\
words at the elder\'92s: \'93I always feel when I meet people that I am lower\
than all, and that they all take me for a buffoon; so I say let me play\
the buffoon, for you are, every one of you, stupider and lower than I.\'94 He\
longed to revenge himself on every one for his own unseemliness. He\
suddenly recalled how he had once in the past been asked, \'93Why do you hate\
so and so, so much?\'94 And he had answered them, with his shameless\
impudence, \'93I\'92ll tell you. He has done me no harm. But I played him a\
dirty trick, and ever since I have hated him.\'94\
\
Remembering that now, he smiled quietly and malignantly, hesitating for a\
moment. His eyes gleamed, and his lips positively quivered. \'93Well, since I\
have begun, I may as well go on,\'94 he decided. His predominant sensation at\
that moment might be expressed in the following words, \'93Well, there is no\
rehabilitating myself now. So let me shame them for all I am worth. I will\
show them I don\'92t care what they think\'97that\'92s all!\'94\
\
He told the coachman to wait, while with rapid steps he returned to the\
monastery and straight to the Father Superior\'92s. He had no clear idea what\
he would do, but he knew that he could not control himself, and that a\
touch might drive him to the utmost limits of obscenity, but only to\
obscenity, to nothing criminal, nothing for which he could be legally\
punished. In the last resort, he could always restrain himself, and had\
marveled indeed at himself, on that score, sometimes. He appeared in the\
Father Superior\'92s dining\uc0\u8208 room, at the moment when the prayer was over, and\
all were moving to the table. Standing in the doorway, he scanned the\
company, and laughing his prolonged, impudent, malicious chuckle, looked\
them all boldly in the face. \'93They thought I had gone, and here I am\
again,\'94 he cried to the whole room.\
\
For one moment every one stared at him without a word; and at once every\
one felt that something revolting, grotesque, positively scandalous, was\
about to happen. Mi\'fcsov passed immediately from the most benevolent frame\
of mind to the most savage. All the feelings that had subsided and died\
down in his heart revived instantly.\
\
\'93No! this I cannot endure!\'94 he cried. \'93I absolutely cannot! and ... I\
certainly cannot!\'94\
\
The blood rushed to his head. He positively stammered; but he was beyond\
thinking of style, and he seized his hat.\
\
\'93What is it he cannot?\'94 cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, \'93that he absolutely\
cannot and certainly cannot? Your reverence, am I to come in or not? Will\
you receive me as your guest?\'94\
\
\'93You are welcome with all my heart,\'94 answered the Superior. \'93Gentlemen!\'94\
he added, \'93I venture to beg you most earnestly to lay aside your\
dissensions, and to be united in love and family harmony\'97with prayer to\
the Lord at our humble table.\'94\
\
\'93No, no, it is impossible!\'94 cried Mi\'fcsov, beside himself.\
\
\'93Well, if it is impossible for Pyotr Alexandrovitch, it is impossible for\
me, and I won\'92t stop. That is why I came. I will keep with Pyotr\
Alexandrovitch everywhere now. If you will go away, Pyotr Alexandrovitch,\
I will go away too, if you remain, I will remain. You stung him by what\
you said about family harmony, Father Superior, he does not admit he is my\
relation. That\'92s right, isn\'92t it, von Sohn? Here\'92s von Sohn. How are you,\
von Sohn?\'94\
\
\'93Do you mean me?\'94 muttered Maximov, puzzled.\
\
\'93Of course I mean you,\'94 cried Fyodor Pavlovitch. \'93Who else? The Father\
Superior could not be von Sohn.\'94\
\
\'93But I am not von Sohn either. I am Maximov.\'94\
\
\'93No, you are von Sohn. Your reverence, do you know who von Sohn was? It\
was a famous murder case. He was killed in a house of harlotry\'97I believe\
that is what such places are called among you\'97he was killed and robbed,\
and in spite of his venerable age, he was nailed up in a box and sent from\
Petersburg to Moscow in the luggage van, and while they were nailing him\
up, the harlots sang songs and played the harp, that is to say, the piano.\
So this is that very von Sohn. He has risen from the dead, hasn\'92t he, von\
Sohn?\'94\
\
\'93What is happening? What\'92s this?\'94 voices were heard in the group of monks.\
\
\'93Let us go,\'94 cried Mi\'fcsov, addressing Kalganov.\
\
\'93No, excuse me,\'94 Fyodor Pavlovitch broke in shrilly, taking another step\
into the room. \'93Allow me to finish. There in the cell you blamed me for\
behaving disrespectfully just because I spoke of eating gudgeon, Pyotr\
Alexandrovitch. Mi\'fcsov, my relation, prefers to have _plus de noblesse que\
de sinc\'e9rit\'e9_ in his words, but I prefer in mine _plus de sinc\'e9rit\'e9 que de\
noblesse_, and\'97damn the _noblesse_! That\'92s right, isn\'92t it, von Sohn?\
Allow me, Father Superior, though I am a buffoon and play the buffoon, yet\
I am the soul of honor, and I want to speak my mind. Yes, I am the soul of\
honor, while in Pyotr Alexandrovitch there is wounded vanity and nothing\
else. I came here perhaps to have a look and speak my mind. My son,\
Alexey, is here, being saved. I am his father; I care for his welfare, and\
it is my duty to care. While I\'92ve been playing the fool, I have been\
listening and having a look on the sly; and now I want to give you the\
last act of the performance. You know how things are with us? As a thing\
falls, so it lies. As a thing once has fallen, so it must lie for ever.\
Not a bit of it! I want to get up again. Holy Father, I am indignant with\
you. Confession is a great sacrament, before which I am ready to bow down\
reverently; but there in the cell, they all kneel down and confess aloud.\
Can it be right to confess aloud? It was ordained by the holy Fathers to\
confess in secret: then only your confession will be a mystery, and so it\
was of old. But how can I explain to him before every one that I did this\
and that ... well, you understand what\'97sometimes it would not be proper to\
talk about it\'97so it is really a scandal! No, Fathers, one might be carried\
along with you to the Flagellants, I dare say ... at the first opportunity\
I shall write to the Synod, and I shall take my son, Alexey, home.\'94\
\
We must note here that Fyodor Pavlovitch knew where to look for the weak\
spot. There had been at one time malicious rumors which had even reached\
the Archbishop (not only regarding our monastery, but in others where the\
institution of elders existed) that too much respect was paid to the\
elders, even to the detriment of the authority of the Superior, that the\
elders abused the sacrament of confession and so on and so on\'97absurd\
charges which had died away of themselves everywhere. But the spirit of\
folly, which had caught up Fyodor Pavlovitch, and was bearing him on the\
current of his own nerves into lower and lower depths of ignominy,\
prompted him with this old slander. Fyodor Pavlovitch did not understand a\
word of it, and he could not even put it sensibly, for on this occasion no\
one had been kneeling and confessing aloud in the elder\'92s cell, so that he\
could not have seen anything of the kind. He was only speaking from\
confused memory of old slanders. But as soon as he had uttered his foolish\
tirade, he felt he had been talking absurd nonsense, and at once longed to\
prove to his audience, and above all to himself, that he had not been\
talking nonsense. And, though he knew perfectly well that with each word\
he would be adding more and more absurdity, he could not restrain himself,\
and plunged forward blindly.\
\
\'93How disgraceful!\'94 cried Pyotr Alexandrovitch.\
\
\'93Pardon me!\'94 said the Father Superior. \'93It was said of old, \'91Many have\
begun to speak against me and have uttered evil sayings about me. And\
hearing it I have said to myself: it is the correction of the Lord and He\
has sent it to heal my vain soul.\'92 And so we humbly thank you, honored\
guest!\'94 and he made Fyodor Pavlovitch a low bow.\
\
\'93Tut\'97tut\'97tut\'97sanctimoniousness and stock phrases! Old phrases and old\
gestures. The old lies and formal prostrations. We know all about them. A\
kiss on the lips and a dagger in the heart, as in Schiller\'92s _Robbers_. I\
don\'92t like falsehood, Fathers, I want the truth. But the truth is not to\
be found in eating gudgeon and that I proclaim aloud! Father monks, why do\
you fast? Why do you expect reward in heaven for that? Why, for reward\
like that I will come and fast too! No, saintly monk, you try being\
virtuous in the world, do good to society, without shutting yourself up in\
a monastery at other people\'92s expense, and without expecting a reward up\
aloft for it\'97you\'92ll find that a bit harder. I can talk sense, too, Father\
Superior. What have they got here?\'94 He went up to the table. \'93Old port\
wine, mead brewed by the Eliseyev Brothers. Fie, fie, fathers! That is\
something beyond gudgeon. Look at the bottles the fathers have brought\
out, he he he! And who has provided it all? The Russian peasant, the\
laborer, brings here the farthing earned by his horny hand, wringing it\
from his family and the tax\uc0\u8208 gatherer! You bleed the people, you know, holy\
fathers.\'94\
\
\'93This is too disgraceful!\'94 said Father Iosif.\
\
Father Pa\'efssy kept obstinately silent. Mi\'fcsov rushed from the room, and\
Kalganov after him.\
\
\'93Well, Father, I will follow Pyotr Alexandrovitch! I am not coming to see\
you again. You may beg me on your knees, I shan\'92t come. I sent you a\
thousand roubles, so you have begun to keep your eye on me. He he he! No,\
I\'92ll say no more. I am taking my revenge for my youth, for all the\
humiliation I endured.\'94 He thumped the table with his fist in a paroxysm\
of simulated feeling. \'93This monastery has played a great part in my life!\
It has cost me many bitter tears. You used to set my wife, the crazy one,\
against me. You cursed me with bell and book, you spread stories about me\
all over the place. Enough, fathers! This is the age of Liberalism, the\
age of steamers and railways. Neither a thousand, nor a hundred roubles,\
no, nor a hundred farthings will you get out of me!\'94\
\
It must be noted again that our monastery never had played any great part\
in his life, and he never had shed a bitter tear owing to it. But he was\
so carried away by his simulated emotion, that he was for one moment\
almost believing it himself. He was so touched he was almost weeping. But\
at that very instant, he felt that it was time to draw back.\
\
The Father Superior bowed his head at his malicious lie, and again spoke\
impressively:\
\
\'93It is written again, \'91Bear circumspectly and gladly dishonor that cometh\
upon thee by no act of thine own, be not confounded and hate not him who\
hath dishonored thee.\'92 And so will we.\'94\
\
\'93Tut, tut, tut! Bethinking thyself and the rest of the rigmarole. Bethink\
yourselves, Fathers, I will go. But I will take my son, Alexey, away from\
here for ever, on my parental authority. Ivan Fyodorovitch, my most\
dutiful son, permit me to order you to follow me. Von Sohn, what have you\
to stay for? Come and see me now in the town. It is fun there. It is only\
one short verst; instead of lenten oil, I will give you sucking\uc0\u8208 pig and\
kasha. We will have dinner with some brandy and liqueur to it.... I\'92ve\
cloudberry wine. Hey, von Sohn, don\'92t lose your chance.\'94 He went out,\
shouting and gesticulating.\
\
It was at that moment Rakitin saw him and pointed him out to Alyosha.\
\
\'93Alexey!\'94 his father shouted, from far off, catching sight of him. \'93You\
come home to me to\uc0\u8208 day, for good, and bring your pillow and mattress, and\
leave no trace behind.\'94\
\
Alyosha stood rooted to the spot, watching the scene in silence.\
Meanwhile, Fyodor Pavlovitch had got into the carriage, and Ivan was about\
to follow him in grim silence without even turning to say good\uc0\u8208 by to\
Alyosha. But at this point another almost incredible scene of grotesque\
buffoonery gave the finishing touch to the episode. Maximov suddenly\
appeared by the side of the carriage. He ran up, panting, afraid of being\
too late. Rakitin and Alyosha saw him running. He was in such a hurry that\
in his impatience he put his foot on the step on which Ivan\'92s left foot\
was still resting, and clutching the carriage he kept trying to jump in.\
\'93I am going with you!\'94 he kept shouting, laughing a thin mirthful laugh\
with a look of reckless glee in his face. \'93Take me, too.\'94\
\
\'93There!\'94 cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, delighted. \'93Did I not say he was von\
Sohn. It is von Sohn himself, risen from the dead. Why, how did you tear\
yourself away? What did you _vonsohn_ there? And how could you get away\
from the dinner? You must be a brazen\uc0\u8208 faced fellow! I am that myself, but\
I am surprised at you, brother! Jump in, jump in! Let him pass, Ivan. It\
will be fun. He can lie somewhere at our feet. Will you lie at our feet,\
von Sohn? Or perch on the box with the coachman. Skip on to the box, von\
Sohn!\'94\
\
But Ivan, who had by now taken his seat, without a word gave Maximov a\
violent punch in the breast and sent him flying. It was quite by chance he\
did not fall.\
\
\'93Drive on!\'94 Ivan shouted angrily to the coachman.\
\
\'93Why, what are you doing, what are you about? Why did you do that?\'94 Fyodor\
Pavlovitch protested.\
\
But the carriage had already driven away. Ivan made no reply.\
\
\'93Well, you are a fellow,\'94 Fyodor Pavlovitch said again.\
\
After a pause of two minutes, looking askance at his son, \'93Why, it was you\
got up all this monastery business. You urged it, you approved of it. Why\
are you angry now?\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ve talked rot enough. You might rest a bit now,\'94 Ivan snapped\
sullenly.\
\
Fyodor Pavlovitch was silent again for two minutes.\
\
\'93A drop of brandy would be nice now,\'94 he observed sententiously, but Ivan\
made no response.\
\
\'93You shall have some, too, when we get home.\'94\
\
Ivan was still silent.\
\
Fyodor Pavlovitch waited another two minutes.\
\
\'93But I shall take Alyosha away from the monastery, though you will dislike\
it so much, most honored Karl von Moor.\'94\
\
Ivan shrugged his shoulders contemptuously, and turning away stared at the\
road. And they did not speak again all the way home.\
\
\
\
\
Book III. The Sensualists\
\
\
\
Chapter I. In The Servants\'92 Quarters\
\
\
The Karamazovs\'92 house was far from being in the center of the town, but it\
was not quite outside it. It was a pleasant\uc0\u8208 looking old house of two\
stories, painted gray, with a red iron roof. It was roomy and snug, and\
might still last many years. There were all sorts of unexpected little\
cupboards and closets and staircases. There were rats in it, but Fyodor\
Pavlovitch did not altogether dislike them. \'93One doesn\'92t feel so solitary\
when one\'92s left alone in the evening,\'94 he used to say. It was his habit to\
send the servants away to the lodge for the night and to lock himself up\
alone. The lodge was a roomy and solid building in the yard. Fyodor\
Pavlovitch used to have the cooking done there, although there was a\
kitchen in the house; he did not like the smell of cooking, and, winter\
and summer alike, the dishes were carried in across the courtyard. The\
house was built for a large family; there was room for five times as many,\
with their servants. But at the time of our story there was no one living\
in the house but Fyodor Pavlovitch and his son Ivan. And in the lodge\
there were only three servants: old Grigory, and his old wife Marfa, and a\
young man called Smerdyakov. Of these three we must say a few words. Of\
old Grigory we have said something already. He was firm and determined and\
went blindly and obstinately for his object, if once he had been brought\
by any reasons (and they were often very illogical ones) to believe that\
it was immutably right. He was honest and incorruptible. His wife, Marfa\
Ignatyevna, had obeyed her husband\'92s will implicitly all her life, yet she\
had pestered him terribly after the emancipation of the serfs. She was set\
on leaving Fyodor Pavlovitch and opening a little shop in Moscow with\
their small savings. But Grigory decided then, once for all, that \'93the\
woman\'92s talking nonsense, for every woman is dishonest,\'94 and that they\
ought not to leave their old master, whatever he might be, for \'93that was\
now their duty.\'94\
\
\'93Do you understand what duty is?\'94 he asked Marfa Ignatyevna.\
\
\'93I understand what duty means, Grigory Vassilyevitch, but why it\'92s our\
duty to stay here I never shall understand,\'94 Marfa answered firmly.\
\
\'93Well, don\'92t understand then. But so it shall be. And you hold your\
tongue.\'94\
\
And so it was. They did not go away, and Fyodor Pavlovitch promised them a\
small sum for wages, and paid it regularly. Grigory knew, too, that he had\
an indisputable influence over his master. It was true, and he was aware\
of it. Fyodor Pavlovitch was an obstinate and cunning buffoon, yet, though\
his will was strong enough \'93in some of the affairs of life,\'94 as he\
expressed it, he found himself, to his surprise, extremely feeble in\
facing certain other emergencies. He knew his weaknesses and was afraid of\
them. There are positions in which one has to keep a sharp look out. And\
that\'92s not easy without a trustworthy man, and Grigory was a most\
trustworthy man. Many times in the course of his life Fyodor Pavlovitch\
had only just escaped a sound thrashing through Grigory\'92s intervention,\
and on each occasion the old servant gave him a good lecture. But it\
wasn\'92t only thrashings that Fyodor Pavlovitch was afraid of. There were\
graver occasions, and very subtle and complicated ones, when Fyodor\
Pavlovitch could not have explained the extraordinary craving for some one\
faithful and devoted, which sometimes unaccountably came upon him all in a\
moment. It was almost a morbid condition. Corrupt and often cruel in his\
lust, like some noxious insect, Fyodor Pavlovitch was sometimes, in\
moments of drunkenness, overcome by superstitious terror and a moral\
convulsion which took an almost physical form. \'93My soul\'92s simply quaking\
in my throat at those times,\'94 he used to say. At such moments he liked to\
feel that there was near at hand, in the lodge if not in the room, a\
strong, faithful man, virtuous and unlike himself, who had seen all his\
debauchery and knew all his secrets, but was ready in his devotion to\
overlook all that, not to oppose him, above all, not to reproach him or\
threaten him with anything, either in this world or in the next, and, in\
case of need, to defend him\'97from whom? From somebody unknown, but terrible\
and dangerous. What he needed was to feel that there was _another_ man, an\
old and tried friend, that he might call him in his sick moments merely to\
look at his face, or, perhaps, exchange some quite irrelevant words with\
him. And if the old servant were not angry, he felt comforted, and if he\
were angry, he was more dejected. It happened even (very rarely however)\
that Fyodor Pavlovitch went at night to the lodge to wake Grigory and\
fetch him for a moment. When the old man came, Fyodor Pavlovitch would\
begin talking about the most trivial matters, and would soon let him go\
again, sometimes even with a jest. And after he had gone, Fyodor\
Pavlovitch would get into bed with a curse and sleep the sleep of the\
just. Something of the same sort had happened to Fyodor Pavlovitch on\
Alyosha\'92s arrival. Alyosha \'93pierced his heart\'94 by \'93living with him, seeing\
everything and blaming nothing.\'94 Moreover, Alyosha brought with him\
something his father had never known before: a complete absence of\
contempt for him and an invariable kindness, a perfectly natural\
unaffected devotion to the old man who deserved it so little. All this was\
a complete surprise to the old profligate, who had dropped all family\
ties. It was a new and surprising experience for him, who had till then\
loved nothing but \'93evil.\'94 When Alyosha had left him, he confessed to\
himself that he had learnt something he had not till then been willing to\
learn.\
\
I have mentioned already that Grigory had detested Adela\'efda Ivanovna, the\
first wife of Fyodor Pavlovitch and the mother of Dmitri, and that he had,\
on the contrary, protected Sofya Ivanovna, the poor \'93crazy woman,\'94 against\
his master and any one who chanced to speak ill or lightly of her. His\
sympathy for the unhappy wife had become something sacred to him, so that\
even now, twenty years after, he could not bear a slighting allusion to\
her from any one, and would at once check the offender. Externally,\
Grigory was cold, dignified and taciturn, and spoke, weighing his words,\
without frivolity. It was impossible to tell at first sight whether he\
loved his meek, obedient wife; but he really did love her, and she knew\
it.\
\
Marfa Ignatyevna was by no means foolish; she was probably, indeed,\
cleverer than her husband, or, at least, more prudent than he in worldly\
affairs, and yet she had given in to him in everything without question or\
complaint ever since her marriage, and respected him for his spiritual\
superiority. It was remarkable how little they spoke to one another in the\
course of their lives, and only of the most necessary daily affairs. The\
grave and dignified Grigory thought over all his cares and duties alone,\
so that Marfa Ignatyevna had long grown used to knowing that he did not\
need her advice. She felt that her husband respected her silence, and took\
it as a sign of her good sense. He had never beaten her but once, and then\
only slightly. Once during the year after Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s marriage\
with Adela\'efda Ivanovna, the village girls and women\'97at that time\
serfs\'97were called together before the house to sing and dance. They were\
beginning \'93In the Green Meadows,\'94 when Marfa, at that time a young woman,\
skipped forward and danced \'93the Russian Dance,\'94 not in the village\
fashion, but as she had danced it when she was a servant in the service of\
the rich Mi\'fcsov family, in their private theater, where the actors were\
taught to dance by a dancing master from Moscow. Grigory saw how his wife\
danced, and, an hour later, at home in their cottage he gave her a lesson,\
pulling her hair a little. But there it ended: the beating was never\
repeated, and Marfa Ignatyevna gave up dancing.\
\
God had not blessed them with children. One child was born but it died.\
Grigory was fond of children, and was not ashamed of showing it. When\
Adela\'efda Ivanovna had run away, Grigory took Dmitri, then a child of three\
years old, combed his hair and washed him in a tub with his own hands, and\
looked after him for almost a year. Afterwards he had looked after Ivan\
and Alyosha, for which the general\'92s widow had rewarded him with a slap in\
the face; but I have already related all that. The only happiness his own\
child had brought him had been in the anticipation of its birth. When it\
was born, he was overwhelmed with grief and horror. The baby had six\
fingers. Grigory was so crushed by this, that he was not only silent till\
the day of the christening, but kept away in the garden. It was spring,\
and he spent three days digging the kitchen garden. The third day was\
fixed for christening the baby: mean\uc0\u8208 time Grigory had reached a\
conclusion. Going into the cottage where the clergy were assembled and the\
visitors had arrived, including Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was to stand god\uc0\u8208 \
father, he suddenly announced that the baby \'93ought not to be christened at\
all.\'94 He announced this quietly, briefly, forcing out his words, and\
gazing with dull intentness at the priest.\
\
\'93Why not?\'94 asked the priest with good\uc0\u8208 humored surprise.\
\
\'93Because it\'92s a dragon,\'94 muttered Grigory.\
\
\'93A dragon? What dragon?\'94\
\
Grigory did not speak for some time. \'93It\'92s a confusion of nature,\'94 he\
muttered vaguely, but firmly, and obviously unwilling to say more.\
\
They laughed, and of course christened the poor baby. Grigory prayed\
earnestly at the font, but his opinion of the new\uc0\u8208 born child remained\
unchanged. Yet he did not interfere in any way. As long as the sickly\
infant lived he scarcely looked at it, tried indeed not to notice it, and\
for the most part kept out of the cottage. But when, at the end of a\
fortnight, the baby died of thrush, he himself laid the child in its\
little coffin, looked at it in profound grief, and when they were filling\
up the shallow little grave he fell on his knees and bowed down to the\
earth. He did not for years afterwards mention his child, nor did Marfa\
speak of the baby before him, and, even if Grigory were not present, she\
never spoke of it above a whisper. Marfa observed that, from the day of\
the burial, he devoted himself to \'93religion,\'94 and took to reading the\
_Lives of the Saints_, for the most part sitting alone and in silence, and\
always putting on his big, round, silver\uc0\u8208 rimmed spectacles. He rarely read\
aloud, only perhaps in Lent. He was fond of the Book of Job, and had\
somehow got hold of a copy of the sayings and sermons of \'93the God\uc0\u8208 fearing\
Father Isaac the Syrian,\'94 which he read persistently for years together,\
understanding very little of it, but perhaps prizing and loving it the\
more for that. Of late he had begun to listen to the doctrines of the sect\
of Flagellants settled in the neighborhood. He was evidently shaken by\
them, but judged it unfitting to go over to the new faith. His habit of\
theological reading gave him an expression of still greater gravity.\
\
He was perhaps predisposed to mysticism. And the birth of his deformed\
child, and its death, had, as though by special design, been accompanied\
by another strange and marvelous event, which, as he said later, had left\
a \'93stamp\'94 upon his soul. It happened that, on the very night after the\
burial of his child, Marfa was awakened by the wail of a new\uc0\u8208 born baby.\
She was frightened and waked her husband. He listened and said he thought\
it was more like some one groaning, \'93it might be a woman.\'94 He got up and\
dressed. It was a rather warm night in May. As he went down the steps, he\
distinctly heard groans coming from the garden. But the gate from the yard\
into the garden was locked at night, and there was no other way of\
entering it, for it was enclosed all round by a strong, high fence. Going\
back into the house, Grigory lighted a lantern, took the garden key, and\
taking no notice of the hysterical fears of his wife, who was still\
persuaded that she heard a child crying, and that it was her own baby\
crying and calling for her, went into the garden in silence. There he\
heard at once that the groans came from the bath\uc0\u8208 house that stood near the\
garden gate, and that they were the groans of a woman. Opening the door of\
the bath\uc0\u8208 house, he saw a sight which petrified him. An idiot girl, who\
wandered about the streets and was known to the whole town by the nickname\
of Lizaveta Smerdyastchaya (Stinking Lizaveta), had got into the bath\uc0\u8208 \
house and had just given birth to a child. She lay dying with the baby\
beside her. She said nothing, for she had never been able to speak. But\
her story needs a chapter to itself.\
\
\
\
Chapter II. Lizaveta\
\
\
There was one circumstance which struck Grigory particularly, and\
confirmed a very unpleasant and revolting suspicion. This Lizaveta was a\
dwarfish creature, \'93not five foot within a wee bit,\'94 as many of the pious\
old women said pathetically about her, after her death. Her broad,\
healthy, red face had a look of blank idiocy and the fixed stare in her\
eyes was unpleasant, in spite of their meek expression. She wandered\
about, summer and winter alike, barefooted, wearing nothing but a hempen\
smock. Her coarse, almost black hair curled like lamb\'92s wool, and formed a\
sort of huge cap on her head. It was always crusted with mud, and had\
leaves, bits of stick, and shavings clinging to it, as she always slept on\
the ground and in the dirt. Her father, a homeless, sickly drunkard,\
called Ilya, had lost everything and lived many years as a workman with\
some well\uc0\u8208 to\u8208 do tradespeople. Her mother had long been dead. Spiteful and\
diseased, Ilya used to beat Lizaveta inhumanly whenever she returned to\
him. But she rarely did so, for every one in the town was ready to look\
after her as being an idiot, and so specially dear to God. Ilya\'92s\
employers, and many others in the town, especially of the tradespeople,\
tried to clothe her better, and always rigged her out with high boots and\
sheepskin coat for the winter. But, although she allowed them to dress her\
up without resisting, she usually went away, preferably to the cathedral\
porch, and taking off all that had been given her\'97kerchief, sheepskin,\
skirt or boots\'97she left them there and walked away barefoot in her smock\
as before. It happened on one occasion that a new governor of the\
province, making a tour of inspection in our town, saw Lizaveta, and was\
wounded in his tenderest susceptibilities. And though he was told she was\
an idiot, he pronounced that for a young woman of twenty to wander about\
in nothing but a smock was a breach of the proprieties, and must not occur\
again. But the governor went his way, and Lizaveta was left as she was. At\
last her father died, which made her even more acceptable in the eyes of\
the religious persons of the town, as an orphan. In fact, every one seemed\
to like her; even the boys did not tease her, and the boys of our town,\
especially the schoolboys, are a mischievous set. She would walk into\
strange houses, and no one drove her away. Every one was kind to her and\
gave her something. If she were given a copper, she would take it, and at\
once drop it in the alms\uc0\u8208 jug of the church or prison. If she were given a\
roll or bun in the market, she would hand it to the first child she met.\
Sometimes she would stop one of the richest ladies in the town and give it\
to her, and the lady would be pleased to take it. She herself never tasted\
anything but black bread and water. If she went into an expensive shop,\
where there were costly goods or money lying about, no one kept watch on\
her, for they knew that if she saw thousands of roubles overlooked by\
them, she would not have touched a farthing. She scarcely ever went to\
church. She slept either in the church porch or climbed over a hurdle\
(there are many hurdles instead of fences to this day in our town) into a\
kitchen garden. She used at least once a week to turn up \'93at home,\'94 that\
is at the house of her father\'92s former employers, and in the winter went\
there every night, and slept either in the passage or the cowhouse. People\
were amazed that she could stand such a life, but she was accustomed to\
it, and, although she was so tiny, she was of a robust constitution. Some\
of the townspeople declared that she did all this only from pride, but\
that is hardly credible. She could hardly speak, and only from time to\
time uttered an inarticulate grunt. How could she have been proud?\
\
It happened one clear, warm, moonlight night in September (many years ago)\
five or six drunken revelers were returning from the club at a very late\
hour, according to our provincial notions. They passed through the \'93back\uc0\u8208 \
way,\'94 which led between the back gardens of the houses, with hurdles on\
either side. This way leads out on to the bridge over the long, stinking\
pool which we were accustomed to call a river. Among the nettles and\
burdocks under the hurdle our revelers saw Lizaveta asleep. They stopped\
to look at her, laughing, and began jesting with unbridled licentiousness.\
It occurred to one young gentleman to make the whimsical inquiry whether\
any one could possibly look upon such an animal as a woman, and so\
forth.... They all pronounced with lofty repugnance that it was\
impossible. But Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was among them, sprang forward and\
declared that it was by no means impossible, and that, indeed, there was a\
certain piquancy about it, and so on.... It is true that at that time he\
was overdoing his part as a buffoon. He liked to put himself forward and\
entertain the company, ostensibly on equal terms, of course, though in\
reality he was on a servile footing with them. It was just at the time\
when he had received the news of his first wife\'92s death in Petersburg,\
and, with crape upon his hat, was drinking and behaving so shamelessly\
that even the most reckless among us were shocked at the sight of him. The\
revelers, of course, laughed at this unexpected opinion; and one of them\
even began challenging him to act upon it. The others repelled the idea\
even more emphatically, although still with the utmost hilarity, and at\
last they went on their way. Later on, Fyodor Pavlovitch swore that he had\
gone with them, and perhaps it was so, no one knows for certain, and no\
one ever knew. But five or six months later, all the town was talking,\
with intense and sincere indignation, of Lizaveta\'92s condition, and trying\
to find out who was the miscreant who had wronged her. Then suddenly a\
terrible rumor was all over the town that this miscreant was no other than\
Fyodor Pavlovitch. Who set the rumor going? Of that drunken band five had\
left the town and the only one still among us was an elderly and much\
respected civil councilor, the father of grown\uc0\u8208 up daughters, who could\
hardly have spread the tale, even if there had been any foundation for it.\
But rumor pointed straight at Fyodor Pavlovitch, and persisted in pointing\
at him. Of course this was no great grievance to him: he would not have\
troubled to contradict a set of tradespeople. In those days he was proud,\
and did not condescend to talk except in his own circle of the officials\
and nobles, whom he entertained so well.\
\
At the time, Grigory stood up for his master vigorously. He provoked\
quarrels and altercations in defense of him and succeeded in bringing some\
people round to his side. \'93It\'92s the wench\'92s own fault,\'94 he asserted, and\
the culprit was Karp, a dangerous convict, who had escaped from prison and\
whose name was well known to us, as he had hidden in our town. This\
conjecture sounded plausible, for it was remembered that Karp had been in\
the neighborhood just at that time in the autumn, and had robbed three\
people. But this affair and all the talk about it did not estrange popular\
sympathy from the poor idiot. She was better looked after than ever. A\
well\uc0\u8208 to\u8208 do merchant\'92s widow named Kondratyev arranged to take her into her\
house at the end of April, meaning not to let her go out until after the\
confinement. They kept a constant watch over her, but in spite of their\
vigilance she escaped on the very last day, and made her way into Fyodor\
Pavlovitch\'92s garden. How, in her condition, she managed to climb over the\
high, strong fence remained a mystery. Some maintained that she must have\
been lifted over by somebody; others hinted at something more uncanny. The\
most likely explanation is that it happened naturally\'97that Lizaveta,\
accustomed to clambering over hurdles to sleep in gardens, had somehow\
managed to climb this fence, in spite of her condition, and had leapt\
down, injuring herself.\
\
Grigory rushed to Marfa and sent her to Lizaveta, while he ran to fetch an\
old midwife who lived close by. They saved the baby, but Lizaveta died at\
dawn. Grigory took the baby, brought it home, and making his wife sit\
down, put it on her lap. \'93A child of God\'97an orphan is akin to all,\'94 he\
said, \'93and to us above others. Our little lost one has sent us this, who\
has come from the devil\'92s son and a holy innocent. Nurse him and weep no\
more.\'94\
\
So Marfa brought up the child. He was christened Pavel, to which people\
were not slow in adding Fyodorovitch (son of Fyodor). Fyodor Pavlovitch\
did not object to any of this, and thought it amusing, though he persisted\
vigorously in denying his responsibility. The townspeople were pleased at\
his adopting the foundling. Later on, Fyodor Pavlovitch invented a surname\
for the child, calling him Smerdyakov, after his mother\'92s nickname.\
\
So this Smerdyakov became Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s second servant, and was\
living in the lodge with Grigory and Marfa at the time our story begins.\
He was employed as cook. I ought to say something of this Smerdyakov, but\
I am ashamed of keeping my readers\'92 attention so long occupied with these\
common menials, and I will go back to my story, hoping to say more of\
Smerdyakov in the course of it.\
\
\
\
Chapter III. The Confession Of A Passionate Heart\'97In Verse\
\
\
Alyosha remained for some time irresolute after hearing the command his\
father shouted to him from the carriage. But in spite of his uneasiness he\
did not stand still. That was not his way. He went at once to the kitchen\
to find out what his father had been doing above. Then he set off,\
trusting that on the way he would find some answer to the doubt tormenting\
him. I hasten to add that his father\'92s shouts, commanding him to return\
home \'93with his mattress and pillow\'94 did not frighten him in the least. He\
understood perfectly that those peremptory shouts were merely \'93a flourish\'94\
to produce an effect. In the same way a tradesman in our town who was\
celebrating his name\uc0\u8208 day with a party of friends, getting angry at being\
refused more vodka, smashed up his own crockery and furniture and tore his\
own and his wife\'92s clothes, and finally broke his windows, all for the\
sake of effect. Next day, of course, when he was sober, he regretted the\
broken cups and saucers. Alyosha knew that his father would let him go\
back to the monastery next day, possibly even that evening. Moreover, he\
was fully persuaded that his father might hurt any one else, but would not\
hurt him. Alyosha was certain that no one in the whole world ever would\
want to hurt him, and, what is more, he knew that no one could hurt him.\
This was for him an axiom, assumed once for all without question, and he\
went his way without hesitation, relying on it.\
\
But at that moment an anxiety of a different sort disturbed him, and\
worried him the more because he could not formulate it. It was the fear of\
a woman, of Katerina Ivanovna, who had so urgently entreated him in the\
note handed to him by Madame Hohlakov to come and see her about something.\
This request and the necessity of going had at once aroused an uneasy\
feeling in his heart, and this feeling had grown more and more painful all\
the morning in spite of the scenes at the hermitage and at the Father\
Superior\'92s. He was not uneasy because he did not know what she would speak\
of and what he must answer. And he was not afraid of her simply as a\
woman. Though he knew little of women, he had spent his life, from early\
childhood till he entered the monastery, entirely with women. He was\
afraid of that woman, Katerina Ivanovna. He had been afraid of her from\
the first time he saw her. He had only seen her two or three times, and\
had only chanced to say a few words to her. He thought of her as a\
beautiful, proud, imperious girl. It was not her beauty which troubled\
him, but something else. And the vagueness of his apprehension increased\
the apprehension itself. The girl\'92s aims were of the noblest, he knew\
that. She was trying to save his brother Dmitri simply through generosity,\
though he had already behaved badly to her. Yet, although Alyosha\
recognized and did justice to all these fine and generous sentiments, a\
shiver began to run down his back as soon as he drew near her house.\
\
He reflected that he would not find Ivan, who was so intimate a friend,\
with her, for Ivan was certainly now with his father. Dmitri he was even\
more certain not to find there, and he had a foreboding of the reason. And\
so his conversation would be with her alone. He had a great longing to run\
and see his brother Dmitri before that fateful interview. Without showing\
him the letter, he could talk to him about it. But Dmitri lived a long way\
off, and he was sure to be away from home too. Standing still for a\
minute, he reached a final decision. Crossing himself with a rapid and\
accustomed gesture, and at once smiling, he turned resolutely in the\
direction of his terrible lady.\
\
He knew her house. If he went by the High Street and then across the\
market\uc0\u8208 place, it was a long way round. Though our town is small, it is\
scattered, and the houses are far apart. And meanwhile his father was\
expecting him, and perhaps had not yet forgotten his command. He might be\
unreasonable, and so he had to make haste to get there and back. So he\
decided to take a short cut by the back\uc0\u8208 way, for he knew every inch of the\
ground. This meant skirting fences, climbing over hurdles, and crossing\
other people\'92s back\uc0\u8208 yards, where every one he met knew him and greeted\
him. In this way he could reach the High Street in half the time.\
\
He had to pass the garden adjoining his father\'92s, and belonging to a\
little tumbledown house with four windows. The owner of this house, as\
Alyosha knew, was a bedridden old woman, living with her daughter, who had\
been a genteel maid\uc0\u8208 servant in generals\'92 families in Petersburg. Now she\
had been at home a year, looking after her sick mother. She always dressed\
up in fine clothes, though her old mother and she had sunk into such\
poverty that they went every day to Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s kitchen for soup\
and bread, which Marfa gave readily. Yet, though the young woman came up\
for soup, she had never sold any of her dresses, and one of these even had\
a long train\'97a fact which Alyosha had learned from Rakitin, who always\
knew everything that was going on in the town. He had forgotten it as soon\
as he heard it, but now, on reaching the garden, he remembered the dress\
with the train, raised his head, which had been bowed in thought, and came\
upon something quite unexpected.\
\
Over the hurdle in the garden, Dmitri, mounted on something, was leaning\
forward, gesticulating violently, beckoning to him, obviously afraid to\
utter a word for fear of being overheard. Alyosha ran up to the hurdle.\
\
\'93It\'92s a good thing you looked up. I was nearly shouting to you,\'94 Mitya\
said in a joyful, hurried whisper. \'93Climb in here quickly! How splendid\
that you\'92ve come! I was just thinking of you!\'94\
\
Alyosha was delighted too, but he did not know how to get over the hurdle.\
Mitya put his powerful hand under his elbow to help him jump. Tucking up\
his cassock, Alyosha leapt over the hurdle with the agility of a bare\uc0\u8208 \
legged street urchin.\
\
\'93Well done! Now come along,\'94 said Mitya in an enthusiastic whisper.\
\
\'93Where?\'94 whispered Alyosha, looking about him and finding himself in a\
deserted garden with no one near but themselves. The garden was small, but\
the house was at least fifty paces away.\
\
\'93There\'92s no one here. Why do you whisper?\'94 asked Alyosha.\
\
\'93Why do I whisper? Deuce take it!\'94 cried Dmitri at the top of his voice.\
\'93You see what silly tricks nature plays one. I am here in secret, and on\
the watch. I\'92ll explain later on, but, knowing it\'92s a secret, I began\
whispering like a fool, when there\'92s no need. Let us go. Over there. Till\
then be quiet. I want to kiss you.\
\
\
    Glory to God in the world,\
    Glory to God in me ...\
\
\
I was just repeating that, sitting here, before you came.\'94\
\
The garden was about three acres in extent, and planted with trees only\
along the fence at the four sides. There were apple\uc0\u8208 trees, maples, limes\
and birch\uc0\u8208 trees. The middle of the garden was an empty grass space, from\
which several hundredweight of hay was carried in the summer. The garden\
was let out for a few roubles for the summer. There were also plantations\
of raspberries and currants and gooseberries laid out along the sides; a\
kitchen garden had been planted lately near the house.\
\
Dmitri led his brother to the most secluded corner of the garden. There,\
in a thicket of lime\uc0\u8208 trees and old bushes of black currant, elder,\
snowball\uc0\u8208 tree, and lilac, there stood a tumble\u8208 down green summer\u8208 house,\
blackened with age. Its walls were of lattice\uc0\u8208 work, but there was still a\
roof which could give shelter. God knows when this summer\uc0\u8208 house was built.\
There was a tradition that it had been put up some fifty years before by a\
retired colonel called von Schmidt, who owned the house at that time. It\
was all in decay, the floor was rotting, the planks were loose, the\
woodwork smelled musty. In the summer\uc0\u8208 house there was a green wooden table\
fixed in the ground, and round it were some green benches upon which it\
was still possible to sit. Alyosha had at once observed his brother\'92s\
exhilarated condition, and on entering the arbor he saw half a bottle of\
brandy and a wineglass on the table.\
\
\'93That\'92s brandy,\'94 Mitya laughed. \'93I see your look: \'91He\'92s drinking again!\'92\
Distrust the apparition.\
\
\
    Distrust the worthless, lying crowd,\
    And lay aside thy doubts.\
\
\
I\'92m not drinking, I\'92m only \'91indulging,\'92 as that pig, your Rakitin, says.\
He\'92ll be a civil councilor one day, but he\'92ll always talk about\
\'91indulging.\'92 Sit down. I could take you in my arms, Alyosha, and press you\
to my bosom till I crush you, for in the whole world\'97in reality\'97in re\uc0\u8208 al\u8208 \
i\uc0\u8208 ty\'97(can you take it in?) I love no one but you!\'94\
\
He uttered the last words in a sort of exaltation.\
\
\'93No one but you and one \'91jade\'92 I have fallen in love with, to my ruin. But\
being in love doesn\'92t mean loving. You may be in love with a woman and yet\
hate her. Remember that! I can talk about it gayly still. Sit down here by\
the table and I\'92ll sit beside you and look at you, and go on talking. You\
shall keep quiet and I\'92ll go on talking, for the time has come. But on\
reflection, you know, I\'92d better speak quietly, for here\'97here\'97you can\
never tell what ears are listening. I will explain everything; as they\
say, \'91the story will be continued.\'92 Why have I been longing for you? Why\
have I been thirsting for you all these days, and just now? (It\'92s five\
days since I\'92ve cast anchor here.) Because it\'92s only to you I can tell\
everything; because I must, because I need you, because to\uc0\u8208 morrow I shall\
fly from the clouds, because to\uc0\u8208 morrow life is ending and beginning. Have\
you ever felt, have you ever dreamt of falling down a precipice into a\
pit? That\'92s just how I\'92m falling, but not in a dream. And I\'92m not afraid,\
and don\'92t you be afraid. At least, I am afraid, but I enjoy it. It\'92s not\
enjoyment though, but ecstasy. Damn it all, whatever it is! A strong\
spirit, a weak spirit, a womanish spirit\'97whatever it is! Let us praise\
nature: you see what sunshine, how clear the sky is, the leaves are all\
green, it\'92s still summer; four o\'92clock in the afternoon and the stillness!\
Where were you going?\'94\
\
\'93I was going to father\'92s, but I meant to go to Katerina Ivanovna\'92s first.\'94\
\
\'93To her, and to father! Oo! what a coincidence! Why was I waiting for you?\
Hungering and thirsting for you in every cranny of my soul and even in my\
ribs? Why, to send you to father and to her, Katerina Ivanovna, so as to\
have done with her and with father. To send an angel. I might have sent\
any one, but I wanted to send an angel. And here you are on your way to\
see father and her.\'94\
\
\'93Did you really mean to send me?\'94 cried Alyosha with a distressed\
expression.\
\
\'93Stay! You knew it! And I see you understand it all at once. But be quiet,\
be quiet for a time. Don\'92t be sorry, and don\'92t cry.\'94\
\
Dmitri stood up, thought a moment, and put his finger to his forehead.\
\
\'93She\'92s asked you, written to you a letter or something, that\'92s why you\'92re\
going to her? You wouldn\'92t be going except for that?\'94\
\
\'93Here is her note.\'94 Alyosha took it out of his pocket. Mitya looked\
through it quickly.\
\
\'93And you were going the back\uc0\u8208 way! Oh, gods, I thank you for sending him by\
the back\uc0\u8208 way, and he came to me like the golden fish to the silly old\
fishermen in the fable! Listen, Alyosha, listen, brother! Now I mean to\
tell you everything, for I must tell some one. An angel in heaven I\'92ve\
told already; but I want to tell an angel on earth. You are an angel on\
earth. You will hear and judge and forgive. And that\'92s what I need, that\
some one above me should forgive. Listen! If two people break away from\
everything on earth and fly off into the unknown, or at least one of them,\
and before flying off or going to ruin he comes to some one else and says,\
\'91Do this for me\'92\'97some favor never asked before that could only be asked on\
one\'92s deathbed\'97would that other refuse, if he were a friend or a brother?\'94\
\
\'93I will do it, but tell me what it is, and make haste,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93Make haste! H\'92m!... Don\'92t be in a hurry, Alyosha, you hurry and worry\
yourself. There\'92s no need to hurry now. Now the world has taken a new\
turning. Ah, Alyosha, what a pity you can\'92t understand ecstasy. But what\
am I saying to him? As though you didn\'92t understand it. What an ass I am!\
What am I saying? \'91Be noble, O man!\'92\'97who says that?\'94\
\
Alyosha made up his mind to wait. He felt that, perhaps, indeed, his work\
lay here. Mitya sank into thought for a moment, with his elbow on the\
table and his head in his hand. Both were silent.\
\
\'93Alyosha,\'94 said Mitya, \'93you\'92re the only one who won\'92t laugh. I should like\
to begin\'97my confession\'97with Schiller\'92s _Hymn to Joy_, _An die Freude_! I\
don\'92t know German, I only know it\'92s called that. Don\'92t think I\'92m talking\
nonsense because I\'92m drunk. I\'92m not a bit drunk. Brandy\'92s all very well,\
but I need two bottles to make me drunk:\
\
\
    Silenus with his rosy phiz\
    Upon his stumbling ass.\
\
\
But I\'92ve not drunk a quarter of a bottle, and I\'92m not Silenus. I\'92m not\
Silenus, though I am strong,(1) for I\'92ve made a decision once for all.\
Forgive me the pun; you\'92ll have to forgive me a lot more than puns to\uc0\u8208 day.\
Don\'92t be uneasy. I\'92m not spinning it out. I\'92m talking sense, and I\'92ll come\
to the point in a minute. I won\'92t keep you in suspense. Stay, how does it\
go?\'94\
\
He raised his head, thought a minute, and began with enthusiasm:\
\
\
    \'93Wild and fearful in his cavern\
     Hid the naked troglodyte,\
     And the homeless nomad wandered\
     Laying waste the fertile plain.\
     Menacing with spear and arrow\
     In the woods the hunter strayed....\
     Woe to all poor wretches stranded\
     On those cruel and hostile shores!\
\
    \'93From the peak of high Olympus\
     Came the mother Ceres down,\
     Seeking in those savage regions\
     Her lost daughter Proserpine.\
     But the Goddess found no refuge,\
     Found no kindly welcome there,\
     And no temple bearing witness\
     To the worship of the gods.\
\
    \'93From the fields and from the vineyards\
     Came no fruits to deck the feasts,\
     Only flesh of bloodstained victims\
     Smoldered on the altar\uc0\u8208 fires,\
     And where\'92er the grieving goddess\
     Turns her melancholy gaze,\
     Sunk in vilest degradation\
     Man his loathsomeness displays.\'94\
\
\
Mitya broke into sobs and seized Alyosha\'92s hand.\
\
\'93My dear, my dear, in degradation, in degradation now, too. There\'92s a\
terrible amount of suffering for man on earth, a terrible lot of trouble.\
Don\'92t think I\'92m only a brute in an officer\'92s uniform, wallowing in dirt\
and drink. I hardly think of anything but of that degraded man\'97if only I\'92m\
not lying. I pray God I\'92m not lying and showing off. I think about that\
man because I am that man myself.\
\
\
    Would he purge his soul from vileness\
    And attain to light and worth,\
    He must turn and cling for ever\
    To his ancient Mother Earth.\
\
\
But the difficulty is how am I to cling for ever to Mother Earth. I don\'92t\
kiss her. I don\'92t cleave to her bosom. Am I to become a peasant or a\
shepherd? I go on and I don\'92t know whether I\'92m going to shame or to light\
and joy. That\'92s the trouble, for everything in the world is a riddle! And\
whenever I\'92ve happened to sink into the vilest degradation (and it\'92s\
always been happening) I always read that poem about Ceres and man. Has it\
reformed me? Never! For I\'92m a Karamazov. For when I do leap into the pit,\
I go headlong with my heels up, and am pleased to be falling in that\
degrading attitude, and pride myself upon it. And in the very depths of\
that degradation I begin a hymn of praise. Let me be accursed. Let me be\
vile and base, only let me kiss the hem of the veil in which my God is\
shrouded. Though I may be following the devil, I am Thy son, O Lord, and I\
love Thee, and I feel the joy without which the world cannot stand.\
\
\
    Joy everlasting fostereth\
    The soul of all creation,\
    It is her secret ferment fires\
    The cup of life with flame.\
    \'92Tis at her beck the grass hath turned\
    Each blade towards the light\
    And solar systems have evolved\
    From chaos and dark night,\
    Filling the realms of boundless space\
    Beyond the sage\'92s sight.\
    At bounteous Nature\'92s kindly breast,\
    All things that breathe drink Joy,\
    And birds and beasts and creeping things\
    All follow where She leads.\
    Her gifts to man are friends in need,\
    The wreath, the foaming must,\
    To angels\'97vision of God\'92s throne,\
    To insects\'97sensual lust.\
\
\
But enough poetry! I am in tears; let me cry. It may be foolishness that\
every one would laugh at. But you won\'92t laugh. Your eyes are shining, too.\
Enough poetry. I want to tell you now about the insects to whom God gave\
\'93sensual lust.\'94\
\
\
    To insects\'97sensual lust.\
\
\
I am that insect, brother, and it is said of me specially. All we\
Karamazovs are such insects, and, angel as you are, that insect lives in\
you, too, and will stir up a tempest in your blood. Tempests, because\
sensual lust is a tempest\'97worse than a tempest! Beauty is a terrible and\
awful thing! It is terrible because it has not been fathomed and never can\
be fathomed, for God sets us nothing but riddles. Here the boundaries meet\
and all contradictions exist side by side. I am not a cultivated man,\
brother, but I\'92ve thought a lot about this. It\'92s terrible what mysteries\
there are! Too many riddles weigh men down on earth. We must solve them as\
we can, and try to keep a dry skin in the water. Beauty! I can\'92t endure\
the thought that a man of lofty mind and heart begins with the ideal of\
the Madonna and ends with the ideal of Sodom. What\'92s still more awful is\
that a man with the ideal of Sodom in his soul does not renounce the ideal\
of the Madonna, and his heart may be on fire with that ideal, genuinely on\
fire, just as in his days of youth and innocence. Yes, man is broad, too\
broad, indeed. I\'92d have him narrower. The devil only knows what to make of\
it! What to the mind is shameful is beauty and nothing else to the heart.\
Is there beauty in Sodom? Believe me, that for the immense mass of mankind\
beauty is found in Sodom. Did you know that secret? The awful thing is\
that beauty is mysterious as well as terrible. God and the devil are\
fighting there and the battlefield is the heart of man. But a man always\
talks of his own ache. Listen, now to come to facts.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter IV. The Confession Of A Passionate Heart\'97In Anecdote\
\
\
\'93I was leading a wild life then. Father said just now that I spent several\
thousand roubles in seducing young girls. That\'92s a swinish invention, and\
there was nothing of the sort. And if there was, I didn\'92t need money\
simply for _that_. With me money is an accessory, the overflow of my\
heart, the framework. To\uc0\u8208 day she would be my lady, to\u8208 morrow a wench out\
of the streets in her place. I entertained them both. I threw away money\
by the handful on music, rioting, and gypsies. Sometimes I gave it to the\
ladies, too, for they\'92ll take it greedily, that must be admitted, and be\
pleased and thankful for it. Ladies used to be fond of me: not all of\
them, but it happened, it happened. But I always liked side\uc0\u8208 paths, little\
dark back\uc0\u8208 alleys behind the main road\'97there one finds adventures and\
surprises, and precious metal in the dirt. I am speaking figuratively,\
brother. In the town I was in, there were no such back\uc0\u8208 alleys in the\
literal sense, but morally there were. If you were like me, you\'92d know\
what that means. I loved vice, I loved the ignominy of vice. I loved\
cruelty; am I not a bug, am I not a noxious insect? In fact a Karamazov!\
Once we went, a whole lot of us, for a picnic, in seven sledges. It was\
dark, it was winter, and I began squeezing a girl\'92s hand, and forced her\
to kiss me. She was the daughter of an official, a sweet, gentle,\
submissive creature. She allowed me, she allowed me much in the dark. She\
thought, poor thing, that I should come next day to make her an offer (I\
was looked upon as a good match, too). But I didn\'92t say a word to her for\
five months. I used to see her in a corner at dances (we were always\
having dances), her eyes watching me. I saw how they glowed with fire\'97a\
fire of gentle indignation. This game only tickled that insect lust I\
cherished in my soul. Five months later she married an official and left\
the town, still angry, and still, perhaps, in love with me. Now they live\
happily. Observe that I told no one. I didn\'92t boast of it. Though I\'92m full\
of low desires, and love what\'92s low, I\'92m not dishonorable. You\'92re\
blushing; your eyes flashed. Enough of this filth with you. And all this\
was nothing much\'97wayside blossoms _\'e0 la_ Paul de Kock\'97though the cruel\
insect had already grown strong in my soul. I\'92ve a perfect album of\
reminiscences, brother. God bless them, the darlings. I tried to break it\
off without quarreling. And I never gave them away. I never bragged of one\
of them. But that\'92s enough. You can\'92t suppose I brought you here simply to\
talk of such nonsense. No, I\'92m going to tell you something more curious;\
and don\'92t be surprised that I\'92m glad to tell you, instead of being\
ashamed.\'94\
\
\'93You say that because I blushed,\'94 Alyosha said suddenly. \'93I wasn\'92t\
blushing at what you were saying or at what you\'92ve done. I blushed because\
I am the same as you are.\'94\
\
\'93You? Come, that\'92s going a little too far!\'94\
\
\'93No, it\'92s not too far,\'94 said Alyosha warmly (obviously the idea was not a\
new one). \'93The ladder\'92s the same. I\'92m at the bottom step, and you\'92re\
above, somewhere about the thirteenth. That\'92s how I see it. But it\'92s all\
the same. Absolutely the same in kind. Any one on the bottom step is bound\
to go up to the top one.\'94\
\
\'93Then one ought not to step on at all.\'94\
\
\'93Any one who can help it had better not.\'94\
\
\'93But can you?\'94\
\
\'93I think not.\'94\
\
\'93Hush, Alyosha, hush, darling! I could kiss your hand, you touch me so.\
That rogue Grushenka has an eye for men. She told me once that she\'92d\
devour you one day. There, there, I won\'92t! From this field of corruption\
fouled by flies, let\'92s pass to my tragedy, also befouled by flies, that is\
by every sort of vileness. Although the old man told lies about my\
seducing innocence, there really was something of the sort in my tragedy,\
though it was only once, and then it did not come off. The old man who has\
reproached me with what never happened does not even know of this fact; I\
never told any one about it. You\'92re the first, except Ivan, of course\'97Ivan\
knows everything. He knew about it long before you. But Ivan\'92s a tomb.\'94\
\
\'93Ivan\'92s a tomb?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
Alyosha listened with great attention.\
\
\'93I was lieutenant in a line regiment, but still I was under supervision,\
like a kind of convict. Yet I was awfully well received in the little\
town. I spent money right and left. I was thought to be rich; I thought so\
myself. But I must have pleased them in other ways as well. Although they\
shook their heads over me, they liked me. My colonel, who was an old man,\
took a sudden dislike to me. He was always down upon me, but I had\
powerful friends, and, moreover, all the town was on my side, so he\
couldn\'92t do me much harm. I was in fault myself for refusing to treat him\
with proper respect. I was proud. This obstinate old fellow, who was\
really a very good sort, kind\uc0\u8208 hearted and hospitable, had had two wives,\
both dead. His first wife, who was of a humble family, left a daughter as\
unpretentious as herself. She was a young woman of four and twenty when I\
was there, and was living with her father and an aunt, her mother\'92s\
sister. The aunt was simple and illiterate; the niece was simple but\
lively. I like to say nice things about people. I never knew a woman of\
more charming character than Agafya\'97fancy, her name was Agafya Ivanovna!\
And she wasn\'92t bad\uc0\u8208 looking either, in the Russian style: tall, stout, with\
a full figure, and beautiful eyes, though a rather coarse face. She had\
not married, although she had had two suitors. She refused them, but was\
as cheerful as ever. I was intimate with her, not in \'91that\'92 way, it was\
pure friendship. I have often been friendly with women quite innocently. I\
used to talk to her with shocking frankness, and she only laughed. Many\
women like such freedom, and she was a girl too, which made it very\
amusing. Another thing, one could never think of her as a young lady. She\
and her aunt lived in her father\'92s house with a sort of voluntary\
humility, not putting themselves on an equality with other people. She was\
a general favorite, and of use to every one, for she was a clever\
dressmaker. She had a talent for it. She gave her services freely without\
asking for payment, but if any one offered her payment, she didn\'92t refuse.\
The colonel, of course, was a very different matter. He was one of the\
chief personages in the district. He kept open house, entertained the\
whole town, gave suppers and dances. At the time I arrived and joined the\
battalion, all the town was talking of the expected return of the\
colonel\'92s second daughter, a great beauty, who had just left a fashionable\
school in the capital. This second daughter is Katerina Ivanovna, and she\
was the child of the second wife, who belonged to a distinguished\
general\'92s family; although, as I learnt on good authority, she too brought\
the colonel no money. She had connections, and that was all. There may\
have been expectations, but they had come to nothing.\
\
\'93Yet, when the young lady came from boarding\uc0\u8208 school on a visit, the whole\
town revived. Our most distinguished ladies\'97two \'91Excellencies\'92 and a\
colonel\'92s wife\'97and all the rest following their lead, at once took her up\
and gave entertainments in her honor. She was the belle of the balls and\
picnics, and they got up _tableaux vivants_ in aid of distressed\
governesses. I took no notice, I went on as wildly as before, and one of\
my exploits at the time set all the town talking. I saw her eyes taking my\
measure one evening at the battery commander\'92s, but I didn\'92t go up to her,\
as though I disdained her acquaintance. I did go up and speak to her at an\
evening party not long after. She scarcely looked at me, and compressed\
her lips scornfully. \'91Wait a bit. I\'92ll have my revenge,\'92 thought I. I\
behaved like an awful fool on many occasions at that time, and I was\
conscious of it myself. What made it worse was that I felt that \'91Katenka\'92\
was not an innocent boarding\uc0\u8208 school miss, but a person of character, proud\
and really high\uc0\u8208 principled; above all, she had education and intellect,\
and I had neither. You think I meant to make her an offer? No, I simply\
wanted to revenge myself, because I was such a hero and she didn\'92t seem to\
feel it.\
\
\'93Meanwhile, I spent my time in drink and riot, till the lieutenant\uc0\u8208 colonel\
put me under arrest for three days. Just at that time father sent me six\
thousand roubles in return for my sending him a deed giving up all claims\
upon him\'97settling our accounts, so to speak, and saying that I wouldn\'92t\
expect anything more. I didn\'92t understand a word of it at the time. Until\
I came here, Alyosha, till the last few days, indeed, perhaps even now, I\
haven\'92t been able to make head or tail of my money affairs with father.\
But never mind that, we\'92ll talk of it later.\
\
\'93Just as I received the money, I got a letter from a friend telling me\
something that interested me immensely. The authorities, I learnt, were\
dissatisfied with our lieutenant\uc0\u8208 colonel. He was suspected of\
irregularities; in fact, his enemies were preparing a surprise for him.\
And then the commander of the division arrived, and kicked up the devil of\
a shindy. Shortly afterwards he was ordered to retire. I won\'92t tell you\
how it all happened. He had enemies certainly. Suddenly there was a marked\
coolness in the town towards him and all his family. His friends all\
turned their backs on him. Then I took my first step. I met Agafya\
Ivanovna, with whom I\'92d always kept up a friendship, and said, \'91Do you\
know there\'92s a deficit of 4,500 roubles of government money in your\
father\'92s accounts?\'92\
\
\'93 \'91What do you mean? What makes you say so? The general was here not long\
ago, and everything was all right.\'92\
\
\'93 \'91Then it was, but now it isn\'92t.\'92\
\
\'93She was terribly scared.\
\
\'93 \'91Don\'92t frighten me!\'92 she said. \'91Who told you so?\'92\
\
\'93 \'91Don\'92t be uneasy,\'92 I said, \'91I won\'92t tell any one. You know I\'92m as silent\
as the tomb. I only wanted, in view of \'93possibilities,\'94 to add, that when\
they demand that 4,500 roubles from your father, and he can\'92t produce it,\
he\'92ll be tried, and made to serve as a common soldier in his old age,\
unless you like to send me your young lady secretly. I\'92ve just had money\
paid me. I\'92ll give her four thousand, if you like, and keep the secret\
religiously.\'92\
\
\'93 \'91Ah, you scoundrel!\'92\'97that\'92s what she said. \'91You wicked scoundrel! How\
dare you!\'92\
\
\'93She went away furiously indignant, while I shouted after her once more\
that the secret should be kept sacred. Those two simple creatures, Agafya\
and her aunt, I may as well say at once, behaved like perfect angels all\
through this business. They genuinely adored their \'91Katya,\'92 thought her\
far above them, and waited on her, hand and foot. But Agafya told her of\
our conversation. I found that out afterwards. She didn\'92t keep it back,\
and of course that was all I wanted.\
\
\'93Suddenly the new major arrived to take command of the battalion. The old\
lieutenant\uc0\u8208 colonel was taken ill at once, couldn\'92t leave his room for two\
days, and didn\'92t hand over the government money. Dr. Kravchenko declared\
that he really was ill. But I knew for a fact, and had known for a long\
time, that for the last four years the money had never been in his hands\
except when the Commander made his visits of inspection. He used to lend\
it to a trustworthy person, a merchant of our town called Trifonov, an old\
widower, with a big beard and gold\uc0\u8208 rimmed spectacles. He used to go to the\
fair, do a profitable business with the money, and return the whole sum to\
the colonel, bringing with it a present from the fair, as well as interest\
on the loan. But this time (I heard all about it quite by chance from\
Trifonov\'92s son and heir, a driveling youth and one of the most vicious in\
the world)\'97this time, I say, Trifonov brought nothing back from the fair.\
The lieutenant\uc0\u8208 colonel flew to him. \'91I\'92ve never received any money from\
you, and couldn\'92t possibly have received any.\'92 That was all the answer he\
got. So now our lieutenant\uc0\u8208 colonel is confined to the house, with a towel\
round his head, while they\'92re all three busy putting ice on it. All at\
once an orderly arrives on the scene with the book and the order to \'91hand\
over the battalion money immediately, within two hours.\'92 He signed the\
book (I saw the signature in the book afterwards), stood up, saying he\
would put on his uniform, ran to his bedroom, loaded his double\uc0\u8208 barreled\
gun with a service bullet, took the boot off his right foot, fixed the gun\
against his chest, and began feeling for the trigger with his foot. But\
Agafya, remembering what I had told her, had her suspicions. She stole up\
and peeped into the room just in time. She rushed in, flung herself upon\
him from behind, threw her arms round him, and the gun went off, hit the\
ceiling, but hurt no one. The others ran in, took away the gun, and held\
him by the arms. I heard all about this afterwards. I was at home, it was\
getting dusk, and I was just preparing to go out. I had dressed, brushed\
my hair, scented my handkerchief, and taken up my cap, when suddenly the\
door opened, and facing me in the room stood Katerina Ivanovna.\
\
\'93It\'92s strange how things happen sometimes. No one had seen her in the\
street, so that no one knew of it in the town. I lodged with two decrepit\
old ladies, who looked after me. They were most obliging old things, ready\
to do anything for me, and at my request were as silent afterwards as two\
cast\uc0\u8208 iron posts. Of course I grasped the position at once. She walked in\
and looked straight at me, her dark eyes determined, even defiant, but on\
her lips and round her mouth I saw uncertainty.\
\
\'93 \'91My sister told me,\'92 she began, \'91that you would give me 4,500 roubles if\
I came to you for it\'97myself. I have come ... give me the money!\'92\
\
\'93She couldn\'92t keep it up. She was breathless, frightened, her voice failed\
her, and the corners of her mouth and the lines round it quivered.\
Alyosha, are you listening, or are you asleep?\'94\
\
\'93Mitya, I know you will tell the whole truth,\'94 said Alyosha in agitation.\
\
\'93I am telling it. If I tell the whole truth just as it happened I shan\'92t\
spare myself. My first idea was a\'97Karamazov one. Once I was bitten by a\
centipede, brother, and laid up a fortnight with fever from it. Well, I\
felt a centipede biting at my heart then\'97a noxious insect, you understand?\
I looked her up and down. You\'92ve seen her? She\'92s a beauty. But she was\
beautiful in another way then. At that moment she was beautiful because\
she was noble, and I was a scoundrel; she in all the grandeur of her\
generosity and sacrifice for her father, and I\'97a bug! And, scoundrel as I\
was, she was altogether at my mercy, body and soul. She was hemmed in. I\
tell you frankly, that thought, that venomous thought, so possessed my\
heart that it almost swooned with suspense. It seemed as if there could be\
no resisting it; as though I should act like a bug, like a venomous\
spider, without a spark of pity. I could scarcely breathe. Understand, I\
should have gone next day to ask for her hand, so that it might end\
honorably, so to speak, and that nobody would or could know. For though\
I\'92m a man of base desires, I\'92m honest. And at that very second some voice\
seemed to whisper in my ear, \'91But when you come to\uc0\u8208 morrow to make your\
proposal, that girl won\'92t even see you; she\'92ll order her coachman to kick\
you out of the yard. \'93Publish it through all the town,\'94 she would say,\
\'93I\'92m not afraid of you.\'94 \'92 I looked at the young lady, my voice had not\
deceived me. That is how it would be, not a doubt of it. I could see from\
her face now that I should be turned out of the house. My spite was\
roused. I longed to play her the nastiest swinish cad\'92s trick: to look at\
her with a sneer, and on the spot where she stood before me to stun her\
with a tone of voice that only a shopman could use.\
\
\'93 \'91Four thousand! What do you mean? I was joking. You\'92ve been counting\
your chickens too easily, madam. Two hundred, if you like, with all my\
heart. But four thousand is not a sum to throw away on such frivolity.\
You\'92ve put yourself out to no purpose.\'92\
\
\'93I should have lost the game, of course. She\'92d have run away. But it would\
have been an infernal revenge. It would have been worth it all. I\'92d have\
howled with regret all the rest of my life, only to have played that\
trick. Would you believe it, it has never happened to me with any other\
woman, not one, to look at her at such a moment with hatred. But, on my\
oath, I looked at her for three seconds, or five perhaps, with fearful\
hatred\'97that hate which is only a hair\'92s\uc0\u8208 breadth from love, from the\
maddest love!\
\
\'93I went to the window, put my forehead against the frozen pane, and I\
remember the ice burnt my forehead like fire. I did not keep her long,\
don\'92t be afraid. I turned round, went up to the table, opened the drawer\
and took out a banknote for five thousand roubles (it was lying in a\
French dictionary). Then I showed it her in silence, folded it, handed it\
to her, opened the door into the passage, and, stepping back, made her a\
deep bow, a most respectful, a most impressive bow, believe me! She\
shuddered all over, gazed at me for a second, turned horribly pale\'97white\
as a sheet, in fact\'97and all at once, not impetuously but softly, gently,\
bowed down to my feet\'97not a boarding\uc0\u8208 school curtsey, but a Russian bow,\
with her forehead to the floor. She jumped up and ran away. I was wearing\
my sword. I drew it and nearly stabbed myself with it on the spot; why, I\
don\'92t know. It would have been frightfully stupid, of course. I suppose it\
was from delight. Can you understand that one might kill oneself from\
delight? But I didn\'92t stab myself. I only kissed my sword and put it back\
in the scabbard\'97which there was no need to have told you, by the way. And\
I fancy that in telling you about my inner conflict I have laid it on\
rather thick to glorify myself. But let it pass, and to hell with all who\
pry into the human heart! Well, so much for that \'91adventure\'92 with Katerina\
Ivanovna. So now Ivan knows of it, and you\'97no one else.\'94\
\
Dmitri got up, took a step or two in his excitement, pulled out his\
handkerchief and mopped his forehead, then sat down again, not in the same\
place as before, but on the opposite side, so that Alyosha had to turn\
quite round to face him.\
\
\
\
Chapter V. The Confession Of A Passionate Heart\'97"Heels Up"\
\
\
\'93Now,\'94 said Alyosha, \'93I understand the first half.\'94\
\
\'93You understand the first half. That half is a drama, and it was played\
out there. The second half is a tragedy, and it is being acted here.\'94\
\
\'93And I understand nothing of that second half so far,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93And I? Do you suppose I understand it?\'94\
\
\'93Stop, Dmitri. There\'92s one important question. Tell me, you were\
betrothed, you are betrothed still?\'94\
\
\'93We weren\'92t betrothed at once, not for three months after that adventure.\
The next day I told myself that the incident was closed, concluded, that\
there would be no sequel. It seemed to me caddish to make her an offer. On\
her side she gave no sign of life for the six weeks that she remained in\
the town; except, indeed, for one action. The day after her visit the\
maid\uc0\u8208 servant slipped round with an envelope addressed to me. I tore it\
open: it contained the change out of the banknote. Only four thousand five\
hundred roubles was needed, but there was a discount of about two hundred\
on changing it. She only sent me about two hundred and sixty. I don\'92t\
remember exactly, but not a note, not a word of explanation. I searched\
the packet for a pencil mark\'97n\uc0\u8208 nothing! Well, I spent the rest of the\
money on such an orgy that the new major was obliged to reprimand me.\
\
\'93Well, the lieutenant\uc0\u8208 colonel produced the battalion money, to the\
astonishment of every one, for nobody believed that he had the money\
untouched. He\'92d no sooner paid it than he fell ill, took to his bed, and,\
three weeks later, softening of the brain set in, and he died five days\
afterwards. He was buried with military honors, for he had not had time to\
receive his discharge. Ten days after his funeral, Katerina Ivanovna, with\
her aunt and sister, went to Moscow. And, behold, on the very day they\
went away (I hadn\'92t seen them, didn\'92t see them off or take leave) I\
received a tiny note, a sheet of thin blue paper, and on it only one line\
in pencil: \'91I will write to you. Wait. K.\'92 And that was all.\
\
\'93I\'92ll explain the rest now, in two words. In Moscow their fortunes changed\
with the swiftness of lightning and the unexpectedness of an Arabian\
fairy\uc0\u8208 tale. That general\'92s widow, their nearest relation, suddenly lost\
the two nieces who were her heiresses and next\uc0\u8208 of\u8208 kin\'97both died in the\
same week of small\uc0\u8208 pox. The old lady, prostrated with grief, welcomed\
Katya as a daughter, as her one hope, clutched at her, altered her will in\
Katya\'92s favor. But that concerned the future. Meanwhile she gave her, for\
present use, eighty thousand roubles, as a marriage portion, to do what\
she liked with. She was an hysterical woman. I saw something of her in\
Moscow, later.\
\
\'93Well, suddenly I received by post four thousand five hundred roubles. I\
was speechless with surprise, as you may suppose. Three days later came\
the promised letter. I have it with me now. You must read it. She offers\
to be my wife, offers herself to me. \'91I love you madly,\'92 she says, \'91even\
if you don\'92t love me, never mind. Be my husband. Don\'92t be afraid. I won\'92t\
hamper you in any way. I will be your chattel. I will be the carpet under\
your feet. I want to love you for ever. I want to save you from yourself.\'92\
Alyosha, I am not worthy to repeat those lines in my vulgar words and in\
my vulgar tone, my everlastingly vulgar tone, that I can never cure myself\
of. That letter stabs me even now. Do you think I don\'92t mind\'97that I don\'92t\
mind still? I wrote her an answer at once, as it was impossible for me to\
go to Moscow. I wrote to her with tears. One thing I shall be ashamed of\
for ever. I referred to her being rich and having a dowry while I was only\
a stuck\uc0\u8208 up beggar! I mentioned money! I ought to have borne it in silence,\
but it slipped from my pen. Then I wrote at once to Ivan, and told him all\
I could about it in a letter of six pages, and sent him to her. Why do you\
look like that? Why are you staring at me? Yes, Ivan fell in love with\
her; he\'92s in love with her still. I know that. I did a stupid thing, in\
the world\'92s opinion; but perhaps that one stupid thing may be the saving\
of us all now. Oo! Don\'92t you see what a lot she thinks of Ivan, how she\
respects him? When she compares us, do you suppose she can love a man like\
me, especially after all that has happened here?\'94\
\
\'93But I am convinced that she does love a man like you, and not a man like\
him.\'94\
\
\'93She loves her own _virtue_, not me.\'94 The words broke involuntarily, and\
almost malignantly, from Dmitri. He laughed, but a minute later his eyes\
gleamed, he flushed crimson and struck the table violently with his fist.\
\
\'93I swear, Alyosha,\'94 he cried, with intense and genuine anger at himself;\
\'93you may not believe me, but as God is holy, and as Christ is God, I swear\
that though I smiled at her lofty sentiments just now, I know that I am a\
million times baser in soul than she, and that these lofty sentiments of\
hers are as sincere as a heavenly angel\'92s. That\'92s the tragedy of it\'97that I\
know that for certain. What if any one does show off a bit? Don\'92t I do it\
myself? And yet I\'92m sincere, I\'92m sincere. As for Ivan, I can understand\
how he must be cursing nature now\'97with his intellect, too! To see the\
preference given\'97to whom, to what? To a monster who, though he is\
betrothed and all eyes are fixed on him, can\'92t restrain his\
debaucheries\'97and before the very eyes of his betrothed! And a man like me\
is preferred, while he is rejected. And why? Because a girl wants to\
sacrifice her life and destiny out of gratitude. It\'92s ridiculous! I\'92ve\
never said a word of this to Ivan, and Ivan of course has never dropped a\
hint of the sort to me. But destiny will be accomplished, and the best man\
will hold his ground while the undeserving one will vanish into his back\uc0\u8208 \
alley for ever\'97his filthy back\uc0\u8208 alley, his beloved back\u8208 alley, where he is\
at home and where he will sink in filth and stench at his own free will\
and with enjoyment. I\'92ve been talking foolishly. I\'92ve no words left. I use\
them at random, but it will be as I have said. I shall drown in the back\uc0\u8208 \
alley, and she will marry Ivan.\'94\
\
\'93Stop, Dmitri,\'94 Alyosha interrupted again with great anxiety. \'93There\'92s one\
thing you haven\'92t made clear yet: you are still betrothed all the same,\
aren\'92t you? How can you break off the engagement if she, your betrothed,\
doesn\'92t want to?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, formally and solemnly betrothed. It was all done on my arrival in\
Moscow, with great ceremony, with ikons, all in fine style. The general\'92s\
wife blessed us, and\'97would you believe it?\'97congratulated Katya. \'91You\'92ve\
made a good choice,\'92 she said, \'91I see right through him.\'92 And\'97would you\
believe it?\'97she didn\'92t like Ivan, and hardly greeted him. I had a lot of\
talk with Katya in Moscow. I told her about myself\'97sincerely, honorably.\
She listened to everything.\
\
\
    There was sweet confusion,\
    There were tender words.\
\
\
Though there were proud words, too. She wrung out of me a mighty promise\
to reform. I gave my promise, and here\'97\'94\
\
\'93What?\'94\
\
\'93Why, I called to you and brought you out here to\uc0\u8208 day, this very\
day\'97remember it\'97to send you\'97this very day again\'97to Katerina Ivanovna,\
and\'97\'94\
\
\'93What?\'94\
\
\'93To tell her that I shall never come to see her again. Say, \'91He sends you\
his compliments.\'92 \'94\
\
\'93But is that possible?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s just the reason I\'92m sending you, in my place, because it\'92s\
impossible. And, how could I tell her myself?\'94\
\
\'93And where are you going?\'94\
\
\'93To the back\uc0\u8208 alley.\'94\
\
\'93To Grushenka, then!\'94 Alyosha exclaimed mournfully, clasping his hands.\
\'93Can Rakitin really have told the truth? I thought that you had just\
visited her, and that was all.\'94\
\
\'93Can a betrothed man pay such visits? Is such a thing possible and with\
such a betrothed, and before the eyes of all the world? Confound it, I\
have some honor! As soon as I began visiting Grushenka, I ceased to be\
betrothed, and to be an honest man. I understand that. Why do you look at\
me? You see, I went in the first place to beat her. I had heard, and I\
know for a fact now, that that captain, father\'92s agent, had given\
Grushenka an I.O.U. of mine for her to sue me for payment, so as to put an\
end to me. They wanted to scare me. I went to beat her. I had had a\
glimpse of her before. She doesn\'92t strike one at first sight. I knew about\
her old merchant, who\'92s lying ill now, paralyzed; but he\'92s leaving her a\
decent little sum. I knew, too, that she was fond of money, that she\
hoarded it, and lent it at a wicked rate of interest, that she\'92s a\
merciless cheat and swindler. I went to beat her, and I stayed. The storm\
broke\'97it struck me down like the plague. I\'92m plague\uc0\u8208 stricken still, and I\
know that everything is over, that there will never be anything more for\
me. The cycle of the ages is accomplished. That\'92s my position. And though\
I\'92m a beggar, as fate would have it, I had three thousand just then in my\
pocket. I drove with Grushenka to Mokroe, a place twenty\uc0\u8208 five versts from\
here. I got gypsies there and champagne and made all the peasants there\
drunk on it, and all the women and girls. I sent the thousands flying. In\
three days\'92 time I was stripped bare, but a hero. Do you suppose the hero\
had gained his end? Not a sign of it from her. I tell you that rogue,\
Grushenka, has a supple curve all over her body. You can see it in her\
little foot, even in her little toe. I saw it, and kissed it, but that was\
all, I swear! \'91I\'92ll marry you if you like,\'92 she said, \'91you\'92re a beggar,\
you know. Say that you won\'92t beat me, and will let me do anything I\
choose, and perhaps I will marry you.\'92 She laughed, and she\'92s laughing\
still!\'94\
\
Dmitri leapt up with a sort of fury. He seemed all at once as though he\
were drunk. His eyes became suddenly bloodshot.\
\
\'93And do you really mean to marry her?\'94\
\
\'93At once, if she will. And if she won\'92t, I shall stay all the same. I\'92ll\
be the porter at her gate. Alyosha!\'94 he cried. He stopped short before\
him, and taking him by the shoulders began shaking him violently. \'93Do you\
know, you innocent boy, that this is all delirium, senseless delirium, for\
there\'92s a tragedy here. Let me tell you, Alexey, that I may be a low man,\
with low and degraded passions, but a thief and a pickpocket Dmitri\
Karamazov never can be. Well, then; let me tell you that I am a thief and\
a pickpocket. That very morning, just before I went to beat Grushenka,\
Katerina Ivanovna sent for me, and in strict secrecy (why I don\'92t know, I\
suppose she had some reason) asked me to go to the chief town of the\
province and to post three thousand roubles to Agafya Ivanovna in Moscow,\
so that nothing should be known of it in the town here. So I had that\
three thousand roubles in my pocket when I went to see Grushenka, and it\
was that money we spent at Mokroe. Afterwards I pretended I had been to\
the town, but did not show her the post office receipt. I said I had sent\
the money and would bring the receipt, and so far I haven\'92t brought it.\
I\'92ve forgotten it. Now what do you think you\'92re going to her to\uc0\u8208 day to\
say? \'91He sends his compliments,\'92 and she\'92ll ask you, \'91What about the\
money?\'92 You might still have said to her, \'91He\'92s a degraded sensualist, and\
a low creature, with uncontrolled passions. He didn\'92t send your money\
then, but wasted it, because, like a low brute, he couldn\'92t control\
himself.\'92 But still you might have added, \'91He isn\'92t a thief though. Here\
is your three thousand; he sends it back. Send it yourself to Agafya\
Ivanovna. But he told me to say \'93he sends his compliments.\'94 \'92 But, as it\
is, she will ask, \'91But where is the money?\'92 \'94\
\
\'93Mitya, you are unhappy, yes! But not as unhappy as you think. Don\'92t worry\
yourself to death with despair.\'94\
\
\'93What, do you suppose I\'92d shoot myself because I can\'92t get three thousand\
to pay back? That\'92s just it. I shan\'92t shoot myself. I haven\'92t the strength\
now. Afterwards, perhaps. But now I\'92m going to Grushenka. I don\'92t care\
what happens.\'94\
\
\'93And what then?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll be her husband if she deigns to have me, and when lovers come, I\'92ll\
go into the next room. I\'92ll clean her friends\'92 goloshes, blow up their\
samovar, run their errands.\'94\
\
\'93Katerina Ivanovna will understand it all,\'94 Alyosha said solemnly. \'93She\'92ll\
understand how great this trouble is and will forgive. She has a lofty\
mind, and no one could be more unhappy than you. She\'92ll see that for\
herself.\'94\
\
\'93She won\'92t forgive everything,\'94 said Dmitri, with a grin. \'93There\'92s\
something in it, brother, that no woman could forgive. Do you know what\
would be the best thing to do?\'94\
\
\'93What?\'94\
\
\'93Pay back the three thousand.\'94\
\
\'93Where can we get it from? I say, I have two thousand. Ivan will give you\
another thousand\'97that makes three. Take it and pay it back.\'94\
\
\'93And when would you get it, your three thousand? You\'92re not of age,\
besides, and you must\'97you absolutely must\'97take my farewell to her to\uc0\u8208 day,\
with the money or without it, for I can\'92t drag on any longer, things have\
come to such a pass. To\uc0\u8208 morrow is too late. I shall send you to father.\'94\
\
\'93To father?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, to father first. Ask him for three thousand.\'94\
\
\'93But, Mitya, he won\'92t give it.\'94\
\
\'93As though he would! I know he won\'92t. Do you know the meaning of despair,\
Alexey?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93Listen. Legally he owes me nothing. I\'92ve had it all from him, I know\
that. But morally he owes me something, doesn\'92t he? You know he started\
with twenty\uc0\u8208 eight thousand of my mother\'92s money and made a hundred\
thousand with it. Let him give me back only three out of the twenty\uc0\u8208 eight\
thousand, and he\'92ll draw my soul out of hell, and it will atone for many\
of his sins. For that three thousand\'97I give you my solemn word\'97I\'92ll make\
an end of everything, and he shall hear nothing more of me. For the last\
time I give him the chance to be a father. Tell him God Himself sends him\
this chance.\'94\
\
\'93Mitya, he won\'92t give it for anything.\'94\
\
\'93I know he won\'92t. I know it perfectly well. Now, especially. That\'92s not\
all. I know something more. Now, only a few days ago, perhaps only\
yesterday he found out for the first time _in earnest_ (underline _in\
earnest_) that Grushenka is really perhaps not joking, and really means to\
marry me. He knows her nature; he knows the cat. And do you suppose he\'92s\
going to give me money to help to bring that about when he\'92s crazy about\
her himself? And that\'92s not all, either. I can tell you more than that. I\
know that for the last five days he has had three thousand drawn out of\
the bank, changed into notes of a hundred roubles, packed into a large\
envelope, sealed with five seals, and tied across with red tape. You see\
how well I know all about it! On the envelope is written: \'91To my angel,\
Grushenka, when she will come to me.\'92 He scrawled it himself in silence\
and in secret, and no one knows that the money\'92s there except the valet,\
Smerdyakov, whom he trusts like himself. So now he has been expecting\
Grushenka for the last three or four days; he hopes she\'92ll come for the\
money. He has sent her word of it, and she has sent him word that perhaps\
she\'92ll come. And if she does go to the old man, can I marry her after\
that? You understand now why I\'92m here in secret and what I\'92m on the watch\
for.\'94\
\
\'93For her?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, for her. Foma has a room in the house of these sluts here. Foma\
comes from our parts; he was a soldier in our regiment. He does jobs for\
them. He\'92s watchman at night and goes grouse\uc0\u8208 shooting in the day\u8208 time; and\
that\'92s how he lives. I\'92ve established myself in his room. Neither he nor\
the women of the house know the secret\'97that is, that I am on the watch\
here.\'94\
\
\'93No one but Smerdyakov knows, then?\'94\
\
\'93No one else. He will let me know if she goes to the old man.\'94\
\
\'93It was he told you about the money, then?\'94\
\
\'93Yes. It\'92s a dead secret. Even Ivan doesn\'92t know about the money, or\
anything. The old man is sending Ivan to Tchermashnya on a two or three\
days\'92 journey. A purchaser has turned up for the copse: he\'92ll give eight\
thousand for the timber. So the old man keeps asking Ivan to help him by\
going to arrange it. It will take him two or three days. That\'92s what the\
old man wants, so that Grushenka can come while he\'92s away.\'94\
\
\'93Then he\'92s expecting Grushenka to\uc0\u8208 day?\'94\
\
\'93No, she won\'92t come to\uc0\u8208 day; there are signs. She\'92s certain not to come,\'94\
cried Mitya suddenly. \'93Smerdyakov thinks so, too. Father\'92s drinking now.\
He\'92s sitting at table with Ivan. Go to him, Alyosha, and ask for the three\
thousand.\'94\
\
\'93Mitya, dear, what\'92s the matter with you?\'94 cried Alyosha, jumping up from\
his place, and looking keenly at his brother\'92s frenzied face. For one\
moment the thought struck him that Dmitri was mad.\
\
\'93What is it? I\'92m not insane,\'94 said Dmitri, looking intently and earnestly\
at him. \'93No fear. I am sending you to father, and I know what I\'92m saying.\
I believe in miracles.\'94\
\
\'93In miracles?\'94\
\
\'93In a miracle of Divine Providence. God knows my heart. He sees my\
despair. He sees the whole picture. Surely He won\'92t let something awful\
happen. Alyosha, I believe in miracles. Go!\'94\
\
\'93I am going. Tell me, will you wait for me here?\'94\
\
\'93Yes. I know it will take some time. You can\'92t go at him point blank. He\'92s\
drunk now. I\'92ll wait three hours\'97four, five, six, seven. Only remember you\
must go to Katerina Ivanovna to\uc0\u8208 day, if it has to be at midnight, _with\
the money or without the money_, and say, \'91He sends his compliments to\
you.\'92 I want you to say that verse to her: \'91He sends his compliments to\
you.\'92 \'94\
\
\'93Mitya! And what if Grushenka comes to\uc0\u8208 day\'97if not to\u8208 day, to\u8208 morrow, or\
the next day?\'94\
\
\'93Grushenka? I shall see her. I shall rush out and prevent it.\'94\
\
\'93And if\'97\'94\
\
\'93If there\'92s an if, it will be murder. I couldn\'92t endure it.\'94\
\
\'93Who will be murdered?\'94\
\
\'93The old man. I shan\'92t kill her.\'94\
\
\'93Brother, what are you saying?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I don\'92t know.... I don\'92t know. Perhaps I shan\'92t kill, and perhaps I\
shall. I\'92m afraid that he will suddenly become so loathsome to me with his\
face at that moment. I hate his ugly throat, his nose, his eyes, his\
shameless snigger. I feel a physical repulsion. That\'92s what I\'92m afraid of.\
That\'92s what may be too much for me.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll go, Mitya. I believe that God will order things for the best, that\
nothing awful may happen.\'94\
\
\'93And I will sit and wait for the miracle. And if it doesn\'92t come to pass\'97\'94\
\
Alyosha went thoughtfully towards his father\'92s house.\
\
\
\
Chapter VI. Smerdyakov\
\
\
He did in fact find his father still at table. Though there was a dining\uc0\u8208 \
room in the house, the table was laid as usual in the drawing\uc0\u8208 room, which\
was the largest room, and furnished with old\uc0\u8208 fashioned ostentation. The\
furniture was white and very old, upholstered in old, red, silky material.\
In the spaces between the windows there were mirrors in elaborate white\
and gilt frames, of old\uc0\u8208 fashioned carving. On the walls, covered with\
white paper, which was torn in many places, there hung two large\
portraits\'97one of some prince who had been governor of the district thirty\
years before, and the other of some bishop, also long since dead. In the\
corner opposite the door there were several ikons, before which a lamp was\
lighted at nightfall ... not so much for devotional purposes as to light\
the room. Fyodor Pavlovitch used to go to bed very late, at three or four\
o\'92clock in the morning, and would wander about the room at night or sit in\
an arm\uc0\u8208 chair, thinking. This had become a habit with him. He often slept\
quite alone in the house, sending his servants to the lodge; but usually\
Smerdyakov remained, sleeping on a bench in the hall.\
\
When Alyosha came in, dinner was over, but coffee and preserves had been\
served. Fyodor Pavlovitch liked sweet things with brandy after dinner.\
Ivan was also at table, sipping coffee. The servants, Grigory and\
Smerdyakov, were standing by. Both the gentlemen and the servants seemed\
in singularly good spirits. Fyodor Pavlovitch was roaring with laughter.\
Before he entered the room, Alyosha heard the shrill laugh he knew so\
well, and could tell from the sound of it that his father had only reached\
the good\uc0\u8208 humored stage, and was far from being completely drunk.\
\
\'93Here he is! Here he is!\'94 yelled Fyodor Pavlovitch, highly delighted at\
seeing Alyosha. \'93Join us. Sit down. Coffee is a lenten dish, but it\'92s hot\
and good. I don\'92t offer you brandy, you\'92re keeping the fast. But would you\
like some? No; I\'92d better give you some of our famous liqueur. Smerdyakov,\
go to the cupboard, the second shelf on the right. Here are the keys. Look\
sharp!\'94\
\
Alyosha began refusing the liqueur.\
\
\'93Never mind. If you won\'92t have it, we will,\'94 said Fyodor Pavlovitch,\
beaming. \'93But stay\'97have you dined?\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 answered Alyosha, who had in truth only eaten a piece of bread and\
drunk a glass of kvas in the Father Superior\'92s kitchen. \'93Though I should\
be pleased to have some hot coffee.\'94\
\
\'93Bravo, my darling! He\'92ll have some coffee. Does it want warming? No, it\'92s\
boiling. It\'92s capital coffee: Smerdyakov\'92s making. My Smerdyakov\'92s an\
artist at coffee and at fish patties, and at fish soup, too. You must come\
one day and have some fish soup. Let me know beforehand.... But, stay;\
didn\'92t I tell you this morning to come home with your mattress and pillow\
and all? Have you brought your mattress? He he he!\'94\
\
\'93No, I haven\'92t,\'94 said Alyosha, smiling, too.\
\
\'93Ah, but you were frightened, you were frightened this morning, weren\'92t\
you? There, my darling, I couldn\'92t do anything to vex you. Do you know,\
Ivan, I can\'92t resist the way he looks one straight in the face and laughs?\
It makes me laugh all over. I\'92m so fond of him. Alyosha, let me give you\
my blessing\'97a father\'92s blessing.\'94\
\
Alyosha rose, but Fyodor Pavlovitch had already changed his mind.\
\
\'93No, no,\'94 he said. \'93I\'92ll just make the sign of the cross over you, for\
now. Sit still. Now we\'92ve a treat for you, in your own line, too. It\'92ll\
make you laugh. Balaam\'92s ass has begun talking to us here\'97and how he\
talks! How he talks!\'94\
\
Balaam\'92s ass, it appeared, was the valet, Smerdyakov. He was a young man\
of about four and twenty, remarkably unsociable and taciturn. Not that he\
was shy or bashful. On the contrary, he was conceited and seemed to\
despise everybody.\
\
But we must pause to say a few words about him now. He was brought up by\
Grigory and Marfa, but the boy grew up \'93with no sense of gratitude,\'94 as\
Grigory expressed it; he was an unfriendly boy, and seemed to look at the\
world mistrustfully. In his childhood he was very fond of hanging cats,\
and burying them with great ceremony. He used to dress up in a sheet as\
though it were a surplice, and sang, and waved some object over the dead\
cat as though it were a censer. All this he did on the sly, with the\
greatest secrecy. Grigory caught him once at this diversion and gave him a\
sound beating. He shrank into a corner and sulked there for a week. \'93He\
doesn\'92t care for you or me, the monster,\'94 Grigory used to say to Marfa,\
\'93and he doesn\'92t care for any one. Are you a human being?\'94 he said,\
addressing the boy directly. \'93You\'92re not a human being. You grew from the\
mildew in the bath\uc0\u8208 house.(2) That\'92s what you are.\'94 Smerdyakov, it appeared\
afterwards, could never forgive him those words. Grigory taught him to\
read and write, and when he was twelve years old, began teaching him the\
Scriptures. But this teaching came to nothing. At the second or third\
lesson the boy suddenly grinned.\
\
\'93What\'92s that for?\'94 asked Grigory, looking at him threateningly from under\
his spectacles.\
\
\'93Oh, nothing. God created light on the first day, and the sun, moon, and\
stars on the fourth day. Where did the light come from on the first day?\'94\
\
Grigory was thunderstruck. The boy looked sarcastically at his teacher.\
There was something positively condescending in his expression. Grigory\
could not restrain himself. \'93I\'92ll show you where!\'94 he cried, and gave the\
boy a violent slap on the cheek. The boy took the slap without a word, but\
withdrew into his corner again for some days. A week later he had his\
first attack of the disease to which he was subject all the rest of his\
life\'97epilepsy. When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of it, his attitude to the boy\
seemed changed at once. Till then he had taken no notice of him, though he\
never scolded him, and always gave him a copeck when he met him.\
Sometimes, when he was in good humor, he would send the boy something\
sweet from his table. But as soon as he heard of his illness, he showed an\
active interest in him, sent for a doctor, and tried remedies, but the\
disease turned out to be incurable. The fits occurred, on an average, once\
a month, but at various intervals. The fits varied too, in violence: some\
were light and some were very severe. Fyodor Pavlovitch strictly forbade\
Grigory to use corporal punishment to the boy, and began allowing him to\
come upstairs to him. He forbade him to be taught anything whatever for a\
time, too. One day when the boy was about fifteen, Fyodor Pavlovitch\
noticed him lingering by the bookcase, and reading the titles through the\
glass. Fyodor Pavlovitch had a fair number of books\'97over a hundred\'97but no\
one ever saw him reading. He at once gave Smerdyakov the key of the\
bookcase. \'93Come, read. You shall be my librarian. You\'92ll be better sitting\
reading than hanging about the courtyard. Come, read this,\'94 and Fyodor\
Pavlovitch gave him _Evenings in a Cottage near Dikanka_.\
\
He read a little but didn\'92t like it. He did not once smile, and ended by\
frowning.\
\
\'93Why? Isn\'92t it funny?\'94 asked Fyodor Pavlovitch.\
\
Smerdyakov did not speak.\
\
\'93Answer, stupid!\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s all untrue,\'94 mumbled the boy, with a grin.\
\
\'93Then go to the devil! You have the soul of a lackey. Stay, here\'92s\
Smaragdov\'92s _Universal History_. That\'92s all true. Read that.\'94\
\
But Smerdyakov did not get through ten pages of Smaragdov. He thought it\
dull. So the bookcase was closed again.\
\
Shortly afterwards Marfa and Grigory reported to Fyodor Pavlovitch that\
Smerdyakov was gradually beginning to show an extraordinary\
fastidiousness. He would sit before his soup, take up his spoon and look\
into the soup, bend over it, examine it, take a spoonful and hold it to\
the light.\
\
\'93What is it? A beetle?\'94 Grigory would ask.\
\
\'93A fly, perhaps,\'94 observed Marfa.\
\
The squeamish youth never answered, but he did the same with his bread,\
his meat, and everything he ate. He would hold a piece on his fork to the\
light, scrutinize it microscopically, and only after long deliberation\
decide to put it in his mouth.\
\
\'93Ach! What fine gentlemen\'92s airs!\'94 Grigory muttered, looking at him.\
\
When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of this development in Smerdyakov he\
determined to make him his cook, and sent him to Moscow to be trained. He\
spent some years there and came back remarkably changed in appearance. He\
looked extraordinarily old for his age. His face had grown wrinkled,\
yellow, and strangely emasculate. In character he seemed almost exactly\
the same as before he went away. He was just as unsociable, and showed not\
the slightest inclination for any companionship. In Moscow, too, as we\
heard afterwards, he had always been silent. Moscow itself had little\
interest for him; he saw very little there, and took scarcely any notice\
of anything. He went once to the theater, but returned silent and\
displeased with it. On the other hand, he came back to us from Moscow well\
dressed, in a clean coat and clean linen. He brushed his clothes most\
scrupulously twice a day invariably, and was very fond of cleaning his\
smart calf boots with a special English polish, so that they shone like\
mirrors. He turned out a first\uc0\u8208 rate cook. Fyodor Pavlovitch paid him a\
salary, almost the whole of which Smerdyakov spent on clothes, pomade,\
perfumes, and such things. But he seemed to have as much contempt for the\
female sex as for men; he was discreet, almost unapproachable, with them.\
Fyodor Pavlovitch began to regard him rather differently. His fits were\
becoming more frequent, and on the days he was ill Marfa cooked, which did\
not suit Fyodor Pavlovitch at all.\
\
\'93Why are your fits getting worse?\'94 asked Fyodor Pavlovitch, looking\
askance at his new cook. \'93Would you like to get married? Shall I find you\
a wife?\'94\
\
But Smerdyakov turned pale with anger, and made no reply. Fyodor\
Pavlovitch left him with an impatient gesture. The great thing was that he\
had absolute confidence in his honesty. It happened once, when Fyodor\
Pavlovitch was drunk, that he dropped in the muddy courtyard three\
hundred\uc0\u8208 rouble notes which he had only just received. He only missed them\
next day, and was just hastening to search his pockets when he saw the\
notes lying on the table. Where had they come from? Smerdyakov had picked\
them up and brought them in the day before.\
\
\'93Well, my lad, I\'92ve never met any one like you,\'94 Fyodor Pavlovitch said\
shortly, and gave him ten roubles. We may add that he not only believed in\
his honesty, but had, for some reason, a liking for him, although the\
young man looked as morosely at him as at every one and was always silent.\
He rarely spoke. If it had occurred to any one to wonder at the time what\
the young man was interested in, and what was in his mind, it would have\
been impossible to tell by looking at him. Yet he used sometimes to stop\
suddenly in the house, or even in the yard or street, and would stand\
still for ten minutes, lost in thought. A physiognomist studying his face\
would have said that there was no thought in it, no reflection, but only a\
sort of contemplation. There is a remarkable picture by the painter\
Kramskoy, called \'93Contemplation.\'94 There is a forest in winter, and on a\
roadway through the forest, in absolute solitude, stands a peasant in a\
torn kaftan and bark shoes. He stands, as it were, lost in thought. Yet he\
is not thinking; he is \'93contemplating.\'94 If any one touched him he would\
start and look at one as though awakening and bewildered. It\'92s true he\
would come to himself immediately; but if he were asked what he had been\
thinking about, he would remember nothing. Yet probably he has, hidden\
within himself, the impression which had dominated him during the period\
of contemplation. Those impressions are dear to him and no doubt he hoards\
them imperceptibly, and even unconsciously. How and why, of course, he\
does not know either. He may suddenly, after hoarding impressions for many\
years, abandon everything and go off to Jerusalem on a pilgrimage for his\
soul\'92s salvation, or perhaps he will suddenly set fire to his native\
village, and perhaps do both. There are a good many \'93contemplatives\'94 among\
the peasantry. Well, Smerdyakov was probably one of them, and he probably\
was greedily hoarding up his impressions, hardly knowing why.\
\
\
\
Chapter VII. The Controversy\
\
\
But Balaam\'92s ass had suddenly spoken. The subject was a strange one.\
Grigory had gone in the morning to make purchases, and had heard from the\
shopkeeper Lukyanov the story of a Russian soldier which had appeared in\
the newspaper of that day. This soldier had been taken prisoner in some\
remote part of Asia, and was threatened with an immediate agonizing death\
if he did not renounce Christianity and follow Islam. He refused to deny\
his faith, and was tortured, flayed alive, and died, praising and\
glorifying Christ. Grigory had related the story at table. Fyodor\
Pavlovitch always liked, over the dessert after dinner, to laugh and talk,\
if only with Grigory. This afternoon he was in a particularly good\uc0\u8208 humored\
and expansive mood. Sipping his brandy and listening to the story, he\
observed that they ought to make a saint of a soldier like that, and to\
take his skin to some monastery. \'93That would make the people flock, and\
bring the money in.\'94\
\
Grigory frowned, seeing that Fyodor Pavlovitch was by no means touched,\
but, as usual, was beginning to scoff. At that moment Smerdyakov, who was\
standing by the door, smiled. Smerdyakov often waited at table towards the\
end of dinner, and since Ivan\'92s arrival in our town he had done so every\
day.\
\
\'93What are you grinning at?\'94 asked Fyodor Pavlovitch, catching the smile\
instantly, and knowing that it referred to Grigory.\
\
\'93Well, my opinion is,\'94 Smerdyakov began suddenly and unexpectedly in a\
loud voice, \'93that if that laudable soldier\'92s exploit was so very great\
there would have been, to my thinking, no sin in it if he had on such an\
emergency renounced, so to speak, the name of Christ and his own\
christening, to save by that same his life, for good deeds, by which, in\
the course of years to expiate his cowardice.\'94\
\
\'93How could it not be a sin? You\'92re talking nonsense. For that you\'92ll go\
straight to hell and be roasted there like mutton,\'94 put in Fyodor\
Pavlovitch.\
\
It was at this point that Alyosha came in, and Fyodor Pavlovitch, as we\
have seen, was highly delighted at his appearance.\
\
\'93We\'92re on your subject, your subject,\'94 he chuckled gleefully, making\
Alyosha sit down to listen.\
\
\'93As for mutton, that\'92s not so, and there\'92ll be nothing there for this, and\
there shouldn\'92t be either, if it\'92s according to justice,\'94 Smerdyakov\
maintained stoutly.\
\
\'93How do you mean \'91according to justice\'92?\'94 Fyodor Pavlovitch cried still\
more gayly, nudging Alyosha with his knee.\
\
\'93He\'92s a rascal, that\'92s what he is!\'94 burst from Grigory. He looked\
Smerdyakov wrathfully in the face.\
\
\'93As for being a rascal, wait a little, Grigory Vassilyevitch,\'94 answered\
Smerdyakov with perfect composure. \'93You\'92d better consider yourself that,\
once I am taken prisoner by the enemies of the Christian race, and they\
demand from me to curse the name of God and to renounce my holy\
christening, I am fully entitled to act by my own reason, since there\
would be no sin in it.\'94\
\
\'93But you\'92ve said that before. Don\'92t waste words. Prove it,\'94 cried Fyodor\
Pavlovitch.\
\
\'93Soup\uc0\u8208 maker!\'94 muttered Grigory contemptuously.\
\
\'93As for being a soup\uc0\u8208 maker, wait a bit, too, and consider for yourself,\
Grigory Vassilyevitch, without abusing me. For as soon as I say to those\
enemies, \'91No, I\'92m not a Christian, and I curse my true God,\'92 then at once,\
by God\'92s high judgment, I become immediately and specially anathema\
accursed, and am cut off from the Holy Church, exactly as though I were a\
heathen, so that at that very instant, not only when I say it aloud, but\
when I think of saying it, before a quarter of a second has passed, I am\
cut off. Is that so or not, Grigory Vassilyevitch?\'94\
\
He addressed Grigory with obvious satisfaction, though he was really\
answering Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s questions, and was well aware of it, and\
intentionally pretending that Grigory had asked the questions.\
\
\'93Ivan,\'94 cried Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly, \'93stoop down for me to whisper.\
He\'92s got this all up for your benefit. He wants you to praise him. Praise\
him.\'94\
\
Ivan listened with perfect seriousness to his father\'92s excited whisper.\
\
\'93Stay, Smerdyakov, be quiet a minute,\'94 cried Fyodor Pavlovitch once more.\
\'93Ivan, your ear again.\'94\
\
Ivan bent down again with a perfectly grave face.\
\
\'93I love you as I do Alyosha. Don\'92t think I don\'92t love you. Some brandy?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'97But you\'92re rather drunk yourself,\'94 thought Ivan, looking steadily at\
his father.\
\
He was watching Smerdyakov with great curiosity.\
\
\'93You\'92re anathema accursed, as it is,\'94 Grigory suddenly burst out, \'93and how\
dare you argue, you rascal, after that, if\'97\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t scold him, Grigory, don\'92t scold him,\'94 Fyodor Pavlovitch cut him\
short.\
\
\'93You should wait, Grigory Vassilyevitch, if only a short time, and listen,\
for I haven\'92t finished all I had to say. For at the very moment I become\
accursed, at that same highest moment, I become exactly like a heathen,\
and my christening is taken off me and becomes of no avail. Isn\'92t that\
so?\'94\
\
\'93Make haste and finish, my boy,\'94 Fyodor Pavlovitch urged him, sipping from\
his wine\uc0\u8208 glass with relish.\
\
\'93And if I\'92ve ceased to be a Christian, then I told no lie to the enemy\
when they asked whether I was a Christian or not a Christian, seeing I had\
already been relieved by God Himself of my Christianity by reason of the\
thought alone, before I had time to utter a word to the enemy. And if I\
have already been discharged, in what manner and with what sort of justice\
can I be held responsible as a Christian in the other world for having\
denied Christ, when, through the very thought alone, before denying Him I\
had been relieved from my christening? If I\'92m no longer a Christian, then\
I can\'92t renounce Christ, for I\'92ve nothing then to renounce. Who will hold\
an unclean Tatar responsible, Grigory Vassilyevitch, even in heaven, for\
not having been born a Christian? And who would punish him for that,\
considering that you can\'92t take two skins off one ox? For God Almighty\
Himself, even if He did make the Tatar responsible, when he dies would\
give him the smallest possible punishment, I imagine (since he must be\
punished), judging that he is not to blame if he has come into the world\
an unclean heathen, from heathen parents. The Lord God can\'92t surely take a\
Tatar and say he was a Christian? That would mean that the Almighty would\
tell a real untruth. And can the Lord of Heaven and earth tell a lie, even\
in one word?\'94\
\
Grigory was thunderstruck and looked at the orator, his eyes nearly\
starting out of his head. Though he did not clearly understand what was\
said, he had caught something in this rigmarole, and stood, looking like a\
man who has just hit his head against a wall. Fyodor Pavlovitch emptied\
his glass and went off into his shrill laugh.\
\
\'93Alyosha! Alyosha! What do you say to that! Ah, you casuist! He must have\
been with the Jesuits, somewhere, Ivan. Oh, you stinking Jesuit, who\
taught you? But you\'92re talking nonsense, you casuist, nonsense, nonsense,\
nonsense. Don\'92t cry, Grigory, we\'92ll reduce him to smoke and ashes in a\
moment. Tell me this, O ass; you may be right before your enemies, but you\
have renounced your faith all the same in your own heart, and you say\
yourself that in that very hour you became anathema accursed. And if once\
you\'92re anathema they won\'92t pat you on the head for it in hell. What do you\
say to that, my fine Jesuit?\'94\
\
\'93There is no doubt that I have renounced it in my own heart, but there was\
no special sin in that. Or if there was sin, it was the most ordinary.\'94\
\
\'93How\'92s that the most ordinary?\'94\
\
\'93You lie, accursed one!\'94 hissed Grigory.\
\
\'93Consider yourself, Grigory Vassilyevitch,\'94 Smerdyakov went on, staid and\
unruffled, conscious of his triumph, but, as it were, generous to the\
vanquished foe. \'93Consider yourself, Grigory Vassilyevitch; it is said in\
the Scripture that if you have faith, even as a mustard seed, and bid a\
mountain move into the sea, it will move without the least delay at your\
bidding. Well, Grigory Vassilyevitch, if I\'92m without faith and you have so\
great a faith that you are continually swearing at me, you try yourself\
telling this mountain, not to move into the sea for that\'92s a long way off,\
but even to our stinking little river which runs at the bottom of the\
garden. You\'92ll see for yourself that it won\'92t budge, but will remain just\
where it is however much you shout at it, and that shows, Grigory\
Vassilyevitch, that you haven\'92t faith in the proper manner, and only abuse\
others about it. Again, taking into consideration that no one in our day,\
not only you, but actually no one, from the highest person to the lowest\
peasant, can shove mountains into the sea\'97except perhaps some one man in\
the world, or, at most, two, and they most likely are saving their souls\
in secret somewhere in the Egyptian desert, so you wouldn\'92t find them\'97if\
so it be, if all the rest have no faith, will God curse all the rest? that\
is, the population of the whole earth, except about two hermits in the\
desert, and in His well\uc0\u8208 known mercy will He not forgive one of them? And\
so I\'92m persuaded that though I may once have doubted I shall be forgiven\
if I shed tears of repentance.\'94\
\
\'93Stay!\'94 cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, in a transport of delight. \'93So you do\
suppose there are two who can move mountains? Ivan, make a note of it,\
write it down. There you have the Russian all over!\'94\
\
\'93You\'92re quite right in saying it\'92s characteristic of the people\'92s faith,\'94\
Ivan assented, with an approving smile.\
\
\'93You agree. Then it must be so, if you agree. It\'92s true, isn\'92t it,\
Alyosha? That\'92s the Russian faith all over, isn\'92t it?\'94\
\
\'93No, Smerdyakov has not the Russian faith at all,\'94 said Alyosha firmly and\
gravely.\
\
\'93I\'92m not talking about his faith. I mean those two in the desert, only\
that idea. Surely that\'92s Russian, isn\'92t it?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, that\'92s purely Russian,\'94 said Alyosha smiling.\
\
\'93Your words are worth a gold piece, O ass, and I\'92ll give it to you to\uc0\u8208 day.\
But as to the rest you talk nonsense, nonsense, nonsense. Let me tell you,\
stupid, that we here are all of little faith, only from carelessness,\
because we haven\'92t time; things are too much for us, and, in the second\
place, the Lord God has given us so little time, only twenty\uc0\u8208 four hours in\
the day, so that one hasn\'92t even time to get sleep enough, much less to\
repent of one\'92s sins. While you have denied your faith to your enemies\
when you\'92d nothing else to think about but to show your faith! So I\
consider, brother, that it constitutes a sin.\'94\
\
\'93Constitute a sin it may, but consider yourself, Grigory Vassilyevitch,\
that it only extenuates it, if it does constitute. If I had believed then\
in very truth, as I ought to have believed, then it really would have been\
sinful if I had not faced tortures for my faith, and had gone over to the\
pagan Mohammedan faith. But, of course, it wouldn\'92t have come to torture\
then, because I should only have had to say at that instant to the\
mountain, \'91Move and crush the tormentor,\'92 and it would have moved and at\
the very instant have crushed him like a black\uc0\u8208 beetle, and I should have\
walked away as though nothing had happened, praising and glorifying God.\
But, suppose at that very moment I had tried all that, and cried to that\
mountain, \'91Crush these tormentors,\'92 and it hadn\'92t crushed them, how could\
I have helped doubting, pray, at such a time, and at such a dread hour of\
mortal terror? And apart from that, I should know already that I could not\
attain to the fullness of the Kingdom of Heaven (for since the mountain\
had not moved at my word, they could not think very much of my faith up\
aloft, and there could be no very great reward awaiting me in the world to\
come). So why should I let them flay the skin off me as well, and to no\
good purpose? For, even though they had flayed my skin half off my back,\
even then the mountain would not have moved at my word or at my cry. And\
at such a moment not only doubt might come over one but one might lose\
one\'92s reason from fear, so that one would not be able to think at all.\
And, therefore, how should I be particularly to blame if not seeing my\
advantage or reward there or here, I should, at least, save my skin. And\
so trusting fully in the grace of the Lord I should cherish the hope that\
I might be altogether forgiven.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter VIII. Over The Brandy\
\
\
The controversy was over. But, strange to say, Fyodor Pavlovitch, who had\
been so gay, suddenly began frowning. He frowned and gulped brandy, and it\
was already a glass too much.\
\
\'93Get along with you, Jesuits!\'94 he cried to the servants. \'93Go away,\
Smerdyakov. I\'92ll send you the gold piece I promised you to\uc0\u8208 day, but be\
off! Don\'92t cry, Grigory. Go to Marfa. She\'92ll comfort you and put you to\
bed. The rascals won\'92t let us sit in peace after dinner,\'94 he snapped\
peevishly, as the servants promptly withdrew at his word.\
\
\'93Smerdyakov always pokes himself in now, after dinner. It\'92s you he\'92s so\
interested in. What have you done to fascinate him?\'94 he added to Ivan.\
\
\'93Nothing whatever,\'94 answered Ivan. \'93He\'92s pleased to have a high opinion of\
me; he\'92s a lackey and a mean soul. Raw material for revolution, however,\
when the time comes.\'94\
\
\'93For revolution?\'94\
\
\'93There will be others and better ones. But there will be some like him as\
well. His kind will come first, and better ones after.\'94\
\
\'93And when will the time come?\'94\
\
\'93The rocket will go off and fizzle out, perhaps. The peasants are not very\
fond of listening to these soup\uc0\u8208 makers, so far.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, brother, but a Balaam\'92s ass like that thinks and thinks, and the\
devil knows where he gets to.\'94\
\
\'93He\'92s storing up ideas,\'94 said Ivan, smiling.\
\
\'93You see, I know he can\'92t bear me, nor any one else, even you, though you\
fancy that he has a high opinion of you. Worse still with Alyosha, he\
despises Alyosha. But he doesn\'92t steal, that\'92s one thing, and he\'92s not a\
gossip, he holds his tongue, and doesn\'92t wash our dirty linen in public.\
He makes capital fish pasties too. But, damn him, is he worth talking\
about so much?\'94\
\
\'93Of course he isn\'92t.\'94\
\
\'93And as for the ideas he may be hatching, the Russian peasant, generally\
speaking, needs thrashing. That I\'92ve always maintained. Our peasants are\
swindlers, and don\'92t deserve to be pitied, and it\'92s a good thing they\'92re\
still flogged sometimes. Russia is rich in birches. If they destroyed the\
forests, it would be the ruin of Russia. I stand up for the clever people.\
We\'92ve left off thrashing the peasants, we\'92ve grown so clever, but they go\
on thrashing themselves. And a good thing too. \'91For with what measure ye\
mete it shall be measured to you again,\'92 or how does it go? Anyhow, it\
will be measured. But Russia\'92s all swinishness. My dear, if you only knew\
how I hate Russia.... That is, not Russia, but all this vice! But maybe I\
mean Russia. _Tout cela c\'92est de la cochonnerie_.... Do you know what I\
like? I like wit.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ve had another glass. That\'92s enough.\'94\
\
\'93Wait a bit. I\'92ll have one more, and then another, and then I\'92ll stop. No,\
stay, you interrupted me. At Mokroe I was talking to an old man, and he\
told me: \'91There\'92s nothing we like so much as sentencing girls to be\
thrashed, and we always give the lads the job of thrashing them. And the\
girl he has thrashed to\uc0\u8208 day, the young man will ask in marriage to\u8208 morrow.\
So it quite suits the girls, too,\'92 he said. There\'92s a set of de Sades for\
you! But it\'92s clever, anyway. Shall we go over and have a look at it, eh?\
Alyosha, are you blushing? Don\'92t be bashful, child. I\'92m sorry I didn\'92t\
stay to dinner at the Superior\'92s and tell the monks about the girls at\
Mokroe. Alyosha, don\'92t be angry that I offended your Superior this\
morning. I lost my temper. If there is a God, if He exists, then, of\
course, I\'92m to blame, and I shall have to answer for it. But if there\
isn\'92t a God at all, what do they deserve, your fathers? It\'92s not enough to\
cut their heads off, for they keep back progress. Would you believe it,\
Ivan, that that lacerates my sentiments? No, you don\'92t believe it as I see\
from your eyes. You believe what people say, that I\'92m nothing but a\
buffoon. Alyosha, do you believe that I\'92m nothing but a buffoon?\'94\
\
\'93No, I don\'92t believe it.\'94\
\
\'93And I believe you don\'92t, and that you speak the truth. You look sincere\
and you speak sincerely. But not Ivan. Ivan\'92s supercilious.... I\'92d make an\
end of your monks, though, all the same. I\'92d take all that mystic stuff\
and suppress it, once for all, all over Russia, so as to bring all the\
fools to reason. And the gold and the silver that would flow into the\
mint!\'94\
\
\'93But why suppress it?\'94 asked Ivan.\
\
\'93That Truth may prevail. That\'92s why.\'94\
\
\'93Well, if Truth were to prevail, you know, you\'92d be the first to be robbed\
and suppressed.\'94\
\
\'93Ah! I dare say you\'92re right. Ah, I\'92m an ass!\'94 burst out Fyodor\
Pavlovitch, striking himself lightly on the forehead. \'93Well, your\
monastery may stand then, Alyosha, if that\'92s how it is. And we clever\
people will sit snug and enjoy our brandy. You know, Ivan, it must have\
been so ordained by the Almighty Himself. Ivan, speak, is there a God or\
not? Stay, speak the truth, speak seriously. Why are you laughing again?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m laughing that you should have made a clever remark just now about\
Smerdyakov\'92s belief in the existence of two saints who could move\
mountains.\'94\
\
\'93Why, am I like him now, then?\'94\
\
\'93Very much.\'94\
\
\'93Well, that shows I\'92m a Russian, too, and I have a Russian characteristic.\
And you may be caught in the same way, though you are a philosopher. Shall\
I catch you? What do you bet that I\'92ll catch you to\uc0\u8208 morrow. Speak, all the\
same, is there a God, or not? Only, be serious. I want you to be serious\
now.\'94\
\
\'93No, there is no God.\'94\
\
\'93Alyosha, is there a God?\'94\
\
\'93There is.\'94\
\
\'93Ivan, and is there immortality of some sort, just a little, just a tiny\
bit?\'94\
\
\'93There is no immortality either.\'94\
\
\'93None at all?\'94\
\
\'93None at all.\'94\
\
\'93There\'92s absolute nothingness then. Perhaps there is just something?\
Anything is better than nothing!\'94\
\
\'93Absolute nothingness.\'94\
\
\'93Alyosha, is there immortality?\'94\
\
\'93There is.\'94\
\
\'93God and immortality?\'94\
\
\'93God and immortality. In God is immortality.\'94\
\
\'93H\'92m! It\'92s more likely Ivan\'92s right. Good Lord! to think what faith, what\
force of all kinds, man has lavished for nothing, on that dream, and for\
how many thousand years. Who is it laughing at man? Ivan! For the last\
time, once for all, is there a God or not? I ask for the last time!\'94\
\
\'93And for the last time there is not.\'94\
\
\'93Who is laughing at mankind, Ivan?\'94\
\
\'93It must be the devil,\'94 said Ivan, smiling.\
\
\'93And the devil? Does he exist?\'94\
\
\'93No, there\'92s no devil either.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s a pity. Damn it all, what wouldn\'92t I do to the man who first\
invented God! Hanging on a bitter aspen tree would be too good for him.\'94\
\
\'93There would have been no civilization if they hadn\'92t invented God.\'94\
\
\'93Wouldn\'92t there have been? Without God?\'94\
\
\'93No. And there would have been no brandy either. But I must take your\
brandy away from you, anyway.\'94\
\
\'93Stop, stop, stop, dear boy, one more little glass. I\'92ve hurt Alyosha\'92s\
feelings. You\'92re not angry with me, Alyosha? My dear little Alexey!\'94\
\
\'93No, I am not angry. I know your thoughts. Your heart is better than your\
head.\'94\
\
\'93My heart better than my head, is it? Oh, Lord! And that from you. Ivan,\
do you love Alyosha?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93You must love him\'94 (Fyodor Pavlovitch was by this time very drunk).\
\'93Listen, Alyosha, I was rude to your elder this morning. But I was\
excited. But there\'92s wit in that elder, don\'92t you think, Ivan?\'94\
\
\'93Very likely.\'94\
\
\'93There is, there is. _Il y a du Piron l\'e0\uc0\u8208 dedans._ He\'92s a Jesuit, a Russian\
one, that is. As he\'92s an honorable person there\'92s a hidden indignation\
boiling within him at having to pretend and affect holiness.\'94\
\
\'93But, of course, he believes in God.\'94\
\
\'93Not a bit of it. Didn\'92t you know? Why, he tells every one so, himself.\
That is, not every one, but all the clever people who come to him. He said\
straight out to Governor Schultz not long ago: \'91_Credo_, but I don\'92t know\
in what.\'92 \'94\
\
\'93Really?\'94\
\
\'93He really did. But I respect him. There\'92s something of Mephistopheles\
about him, or rather of \'91The hero of our time\'92 ... Arbenin, or what\'92s his\
name?... You see, he\'92s a sensualist. He\'92s such a sensualist that I should\
be afraid for my daughter or my wife if she went to confess to him. You\
know, when he begins telling stories.... The year before last he invited\
us to tea, tea with liqueur (the ladies send him liqueur), and began\
telling us about old times till we nearly split our sides.... Especially\
how he once cured a paralyzed woman. \'91If my legs were not bad I know a\
dance I could dance you,\'92 he said. What do you say to that? \'91I\'92ve plenty\
of tricks in my time,\'92 said he. He did Dernidov, the merchant, out of\
sixty thousand.\'94\
\
\'93What, he stole it?\'94\
\
\'93He brought him the money as a man he could trust, saying, \'91Take care of\
it for me, friend, there\'92ll be a police search at my place to\uc0\u8208 morrow.\'92 And\
he kept it. \'91You have given it to the Church,\'92 he declared. I said to him:\
\'91You\'92re a scoundrel,\'92 I said. \'91No,\'92 said he, \'91I\'92m not a scoundrel, but I\'92m\
broad\uc0\u8208 minded.\'92 But that wasn\'92t he, that was some one else. I\'92ve muddled\
him with some one else ... without noticing it. Come, another glass and\
that\'92s enough. Take away the bottle, Ivan. I\'92ve been telling lies. Why\
didn\'92t you stop me, Ivan, and tell me I was lying?\'94\
\
\'93I knew you\'92d stop of yourself.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s a lie. You did it from spite, from simple spite against me. You\
despise me. You have come to me and despised me in my own house.\'94\
\
\'93Well, I\'92m going away. You\'92ve had too much brandy.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve begged you for Christ\'92s sake to go to Tchermashnya for a day or two,\
and you don\'92t go.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll go to\uc0\u8208 morrow if you\'92re so set upon it.\'94\
\
\'93You won\'92t go. You want to keep an eye on me. That\'92s what you want,\
spiteful fellow. That\'92s why you won\'92t go.\'94\
\
The old man persisted. He had reached that state of drunkenness when the\
drunkard who has till then been inoffensive tries to pick a quarrel and to\
assert himself.\
\
\'93Why are you looking at me? Why do you look like that? Your eyes look at\
me and say, \'91You ugly drunkard!\'92 Your eyes are mistrustful. They\'92re\
contemptuous.... You\'92ve come here with some design. Alyosha, here, looks\
at me and his eyes shine. Alyosha doesn\'92t despise me. Alexey, you mustn\'92t\
love Ivan.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t be ill\uc0\u8208 tempered with my brother. Leave off attacking him,\'94 Alyosha\
said emphatically.\
\
\'93Oh, all right. Ugh, my head aches. Take away the brandy, Ivan. It\'92s the\
third time I\'92ve told you.\'94\
\
He mused, and suddenly a slow, cunning grin spread over his face.\
\
\'93Don\'92t be angry with a feeble old man, Ivan. I know you don\'92t love me, but\
don\'92t be angry all the same. You\'92ve nothing to love me for. You go to\
Tchermashnya. I\'92ll come to you myself and bring you a present. I\'92ll show\
you a little wench there. I\'92ve had my eye on her a long time. She\'92s still\
running about bare\uc0\u8208 foot. Don\'92t be afraid of bare\u8208 footed wenches\'97don\'92t\
despise them\'97they\'92re pearls!\'94\
\
And he kissed his hand with a smack.\
\
\'93To my thinking,\'94 he revived at once, seeming to grow sober the instant he\
touched on his favorite topic. \'93To my thinking ... Ah, you boys! You\
children, little sucking\uc0\u8208 pigs, to my thinking ... I never thought a woman\
ugly in my life\'97that\'92s been my rule! Can you understand that? How could\
you understand it? You\'92ve milk in your veins, not blood. You\'92re not out of\
your shells yet. My rule has been that you can always find something\
devilishly interesting in every woman that you wouldn\'92t find in any other.\
Only, one must know how to find it, that\'92s the point! That\'92s a talent! To\
my mind there are no ugly women. The very fact that she is a woman is half\
the battle ... but how could you understand that? Even in _vieilles\
filles_, even in them you may discover something that makes you simply\
wonder that men have been such fools as to let them grow old without\
noticing them. Bare\uc0\u8208 footed girls or unattractive ones, you must take by\
surprise. Didn\'92t you know that? You must astound them till they\'92re\
fascinated, upset, ashamed that such a gentleman should fall in love with\
such a little slut. It\'92s a jolly good thing that there always are and will\
be masters and slaves in the world, so there always will be a little maid\uc0\u8208 \
of\uc0\u8208 all\u8208 work and her master, and you know, that\'92s all that\'92s needed for\
happiness. Stay ... listen, Alyosha, I always used to surprise your\
mother, but in a different way. I paid no attention to her at all, but all\
at once, when the minute came, I\'92d be all devotion to her, crawl on my\
knees, kiss her feet, and I always, always\'97I remember it as though it were\
to\uc0\u8208 day\'97reduced her to that tinkling, quiet, nervous, queer little laugh.\
It was peculiar to her. I knew her attacks always used to begin like that.\
The next day she would begin shrieking hysterically, and this little laugh\
was not a sign of delight, though it made a very good counterfeit. That\'92s\
the great thing, to know how to take every one. Once Belyavsky\'97he was a\
handsome fellow, and rich\'97used to like to come here and hang about\
her\'97suddenly gave me a slap in the face in her presence. And she\'97such a\
mild sheep\'97why, I thought she would have knocked me down for that blow.\
How she set on me! \'91You\'92re beaten, beaten now,\'92 she said. \'91You\'92ve taken a\
blow from him. You have been trying to sell me to him,\'92 she said.... \'91And\
how dared he strike you in my presence! Don\'92t dare come near me again,\
never, never! Run at once, challenge him to a duel!\'92... I took her to the\
monastery then to bring her to her senses. The holy Fathers prayed her\
back to reason. But I swear, by God, Alyosha, I never insulted the poor\
crazy girl! Only once, perhaps, in the first year; then she was very fond\
of praying. She used to keep the feasts of Our Lady particularly and used\
to turn me out of her room then. I\'92ll knock that mysticism out of her,\
thought I! \'91Here,\'92 said I, \'91you see your holy image. Here it is. Here I\
take it down. You believe it\'92s miraculous, but here, I\'92ll spit on it\
directly and nothing will happen to me for it!\'92... When she saw it, good\
Lord! I thought she would kill me. But she only jumped up, wrung her\
hands, then suddenly hid her face in them, began trembling all over and\
fell on the floor ... fell all of a heap. Alyosha, Alyosha, what\'92s the\
matter?\'94\
\
The old man jumped up in alarm. From the time he had begun speaking about\
his mother, a change had gradually come over Alyosha\'92s face. He flushed\
crimson, his eyes glowed, his lips quivered. The old sot had gone\
spluttering on, noticing nothing, till the moment when something very\
strange happened to Alyosha. Precisely what he was describing in the crazy\
woman was suddenly repeated with Alyosha. He jumped up from his seat\
exactly as his mother was said to have done, wrung his hands, hid his face\
in them, and fell back in his chair, shaking all over in an hysterical\
paroxysm of sudden violent, silent weeping. His extraordinary resemblance\
to his mother particularly impressed the old man.\
\
\'93Ivan, Ivan! Water, quickly! It\'92s like her, exactly as she used to be\
then, his mother. Spurt some water on him from your mouth, that\'92s what I\
used to do to her. He\'92s upset about his mother, his mother,\'94 he muttered\
to Ivan.\
\
\'93But she was my mother, too, I believe, his mother. Was she not?\'94 said\
Ivan, with uncontrolled anger and contempt. The old man shrank before his\
flashing eyes. But something very strange had happened, though only for a\
second; it seemed really to have escaped the old man\'92s mind that Alyosha\'92s\
mother actually was the mother of Ivan too.\
\
\'93Your mother?\'94 he muttered, not understanding. \'93What do you mean? What\
mother are you talking about? Was she?... Why, damn it! of course she was\
yours too! Damn it! My mind has never been so darkened before. Excuse me,\
why, I was thinking, Ivan.... He he he!\'94 He stopped. A broad, drunken,\
half\uc0\u8208 senseless grin overspread his face.\
\
At that moment a fearful noise and clamor was heard in the hall, there\
were violent shouts, the door was flung open, and Dmitri burst into the\
room. The old man rushed to Ivan in terror.\
\
\'93He\'92ll kill me! He\'92ll kill me! Don\'92t let him get at me!\'94 he screamed,\
clinging to the skirt of Ivan\'92s coat.\
\
\
\
Chapter IX. The Sensualists\
\
\
Grigory and Smerdyakov ran into the room after Dmitri. They had been\
struggling with him in the passage, refusing to admit him, acting on\
instructions given them by Fyodor Pavlovitch some days before. Taking\
advantage of the fact that Dmitri stopped a moment on entering the room to\
look about him, Grigory ran round the table, closed the double doors on\
the opposite side of the room leading to the inner apartments, and stood\
before the closed doors, stretching wide his arms, prepared to defend the\
entrance, so to speak, with the last drop of his blood. Seeing this,\
Dmitri uttered a scream rather than a shout and rushed at Grigory.\
\
\'93Then she\'92s there! She\'92s hidden there! Out of the way, scoundrel!\'94\
\
He tried to pull Grigory away, but the old servant pushed him back. Beside\
himself with fury, Dmitri struck out, and hit Grigory with all his might.\
The old man fell like a log, and Dmitri, leaping over him, broke in the\
door. Smerdyakov remained pale and trembling at the other end of the room,\
huddling close to Fyodor Pavlovitch.\
\
\'93She\'92s here!\'94 shouted Dmitri. \'93I saw her turn towards the house just now,\
but I couldn\'92t catch her. Where is she? Where is she?\'94\
\
That shout, \'93She\'92s here!\'94 produced an indescribable effect on Fyodor\
Pavlovitch. All his terror left him.\
\
\'93Hold him! Hold him!\'94 he cried, and dashed after Dmitri. Meanwhile Grigory\
had got up from the floor, but still seemed stunned. Ivan and Alyosha ran\
after their father. In the third room something was heard to fall on the\
floor with a ringing crash: it was a large glass vase\'97not an expensive\
one\'97on a marble pedestal which Dmitri had upset as he ran past it.\
\
\'93At him!\'94 shouted the old man. \'93Help!\'94\
\
Ivan and Alyosha caught the old man and were forcibly bringing him back.\
\
\'93Why do you run after him? He\'92ll murder you outright,\'94 Ivan cried\
wrathfully at his father.\
\
\'93Ivan! Alyosha! She must be here. Grushenka\'92s here. He said he saw her\
himself, running.\'94\
\
He was choking. He was not expecting Grushenka at the time, and the sudden\
news that she was here made him beside himself. He was trembling all over.\
He seemed frantic.\
\
\'93But you\'92ve seen for yourself that she hasn\'92t come,\'94 cried Ivan.\
\
\'93But she may have come by that other entrance.\'94\
\
\'93You know that entrance is locked, and you have the key.\'94\
\
Dmitri suddenly reappeared in the drawing\uc0\u8208 room. He had, of course, found\
the other entrance locked, and the key actually was in Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s\
pocket. The windows of all the rooms were also closed, so Grushenka could\
not have come in anywhere nor have run out anywhere.\
\
\'93Hold him!\'94 shrieked Fyodor Pavlovitch, as soon as he saw him again. \'93He\'92s\
been stealing money in my bedroom.\'94 And tearing himself from Ivan he\
rushed again at Dmitri. But Dmitri threw up both hands and suddenly\
clutched the old man by the two tufts of hair that remained on his\
temples, tugged at them, and flung him with a crash on the floor. He\
kicked him two or three times with his heel in the face. The old man\
moaned shrilly. Ivan, though not so strong as Dmitri, threw his arms round\
him, and with all his might pulled him away. Alyosha helped him with his\
slender strength, holding Dmitri in front.\
\
\'93Madman! You\'92ve killed him!\'94 cried Ivan.\
\
\'93Serve him right!\'94 shouted Dmitri breathlessly. \'93If I haven\'92t killed him,\
I\'92ll come again and kill him. You can\'92t protect him!\'94\
\
\'93Dmitri! Go away at once!\'94 cried Alyosha commandingly.\
\
\'93Alexey! You tell me. It\'92s only you I can believe; was she here just now,\
or not? I saw her myself creeping this way by the fence from the lane. I\
shouted, she ran away.\'94\
\
\'93I swear she\'92s not been here, and no one expected her.\'94\
\
\'93But I saw her.... So she must ... I\'92ll find out at once where she is....\
Good\uc0\u8208 by, Alexey! Not a word to \'c6sop about the money now. But go to\
Katerina Ivanovna at once and be sure to say, \'91He sends his compliments to\
you!\'92 Compliments, his compliments! Just compliments and farewell!\
Describe the scene to her.\'94\
\
Meanwhile Ivan and Grigory had raised the old man and seated him in an\
arm\uc0\u8208 chair. His face was covered with blood, but he was conscious and\
listened greedily to Dmitri\'92s cries. He was still fancying that Grushenka\
really was somewhere in the house. Dmitri looked at him with hatred as he\
went out.\
\
\'93I don\'92t repent shedding your blood!\'94 he cried. \'93Beware, old man, beware\
of your dream, for I have my dream, too. I curse you, and disown you\
altogether.\'94\
\
He ran out of the room.\
\
\'93She\'92s here. She must be here. Smerdyakov! Smerdyakov!\'94 the old man\
wheezed, scarcely audibly, beckoning to him with his finger.\
\
\'93No, she\'92s not here, you old lunatic!\'94 Ivan shouted at him angrily. \'93Here,\
he\'92s fainting! Water! A towel! Make haste, Smerdyakov!\'94\
\
Smerdyakov ran for water. At last they got the old man undressed, and put\
him to bed. They wrapped a wet towel round his head. Exhausted by the\
brandy, by his violent emotion, and the blows he had received, he shut his\
eyes and fell asleep as soon as his head touched the pillow. Ivan and\
Alyosha went back to the drawing\uc0\u8208 room. Smerdyakov removed the fragments of\
the broken vase, while Grigory stood by the table looking gloomily at the\
floor.\
\
\'93Shouldn\'92t you put a wet bandage on your head and go to bed, too?\'94 Alyosha\
said to him. \'93We\'92ll look after him. My brother gave you a terrible blow\'97on\
the head.\'94\
\
\'93He\'92s insulted me!\'94 Grigory articulated gloomily and distinctly.\
\
\'93He\'92s \'91insulted\'92 his father, not only you,\'94 observed Ivan with a forced\
smile.\
\
\'93I used to wash him in his tub. He\'92s insulted me,\'94 repeated Grigory.\
\
\'93Damn it all, if I hadn\'92t pulled him away perhaps he\'92d have murdered him.\
It wouldn\'92t take much to do for \'c6sop, would it?\'94 whispered Ivan to\
Alyosha.\
\
\'93God forbid!\'94 cried Alyosha.\
\
\'93Why should He forbid?\'94 Ivan went on in the same whisper, with a malignant\
grimace. \'93One reptile will devour the other. And serve them both right,\
too.\'94\
\
Alyosha shuddered.\
\
\'93Of course I won\'92t let him be murdered as I didn\'92t just now. Stay here,\
Alyosha, I\'92ll go for a turn in the yard. My head\'92s begun to ache.\'94\
\
Alyosha went to his father\'92s bedroom and sat by his bedside behind the\
screen for about an hour. The old man suddenly opened his eyes and gazed\
for a long while at Alyosha, evidently remembering and meditating. All at\
once his face betrayed extraordinary excitement.\
\
\'93Alyosha,\'94 he whispered apprehensively, \'93where\'92s Ivan?\'94\
\
\'93In the yard. He\'92s got a headache. He\'92s on the watch.\'94\
\
\'93Give me that looking\uc0\u8208 glass. It stands over there. Give it me.\'94\
\
Alyosha gave him a little round folding looking\uc0\u8208 glass which stood on the\
chest of drawers. The old man looked at himself in it; his nose was\
considerably swollen, and on the left side of his forehead there was a\
rather large crimson bruise.\
\
\'93What does Ivan say? Alyosha, my dear, my only son, I\'92m afraid of Ivan.\
I\'92m more afraid of Ivan than the other. You\'92re the only one I\'92m not afraid\
of....\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t be afraid of Ivan either. He is angry, but he\'92ll defend you.\'94\
\
\'93Alyosha, and what of the other? He\'92s run to Grushenka. My angel, tell me\
the truth, was she here just now or not?\'94\
\
\'93No one has seen her. It was a mistake. She has not been here.\'94\
\
\'93You know Mitya wants to marry her, to marry her.\'94\
\
\'93She won\'92t marry him.\'94\
\
\'93She won\'92t. She won\'92t. She won\'92t. She won\'92t on any account!\'94\
\
The old man fairly fluttered with joy, as though nothing more comforting\
could have been said to him. In his delight he seized Alyosha\'92s hand and\
pressed it warmly to his heart. Tears positively glittered in his eyes.\
\
\'93That image of the Mother of God of which I was telling you just now,\'94 he\
said. \'93Take it home and keep it for yourself. And I\'92ll let you go back to\
the monastery.... I was joking this morning, don\'92t be angry with me. My\
head aches, Alyosha.... Alyosha, comfort my heart. Be an angel and tell me\
the truth!\'94\
\
\'93You\'92re still asking whether she has been here or not?\'94 Alyosha said\
sorrowfully.\
\
\'93No, no, no. I believe you. I\'92ll tell you what it is: you go to Grushenka\
yourself, or see her somehow; make haste and ask her; see for yourself,\
which she means to choose, him or me. Eh? What? Can you?\'94\
\
\'93If I see her I\'92ll ask her,\'94 Alyosha muttered, embarrassed.\
\
\'93No, she won\'92t tell you,\'94 the old man interrupted, \'93she\'92s a rogue. She\'92ll\
begin kissing you and say that it\'92s you she wants. She\'92s a deceitful,\
shameless hussy. You mustn\'92t go to her, you mustn\'92t!\'94\
\
\'93No, father, and it wouldn\'92t be suitable, it wouldn\'92t be right at all.\'94\
\
\'93Where was he sending you just now? He shouted \'91Go\'92 as he ran away.\'94\
\
\'93To Katerina Ivanovna.\'94\
\
\'93For money? To ask her for money?\'94\
\
\'93No. Not for money.\'94\
\
\'93He\'92s no money; not a farthing. I\'92ll settle down for the night, and think\
things over, and you can go. Perhaps you\'92ll meet her.... Only be sure to\
come to me to\uc0\u8208 morrow in the morning. Be sure to. I have a word to say to\
you to\uc0\u8208 morrow. Will you come?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93When you come, pretend you\'92ve come of your own accord to ask after me.\
Don\'92t tell any one I told you to. Don\'92t say a word to Ivan.\'94\
\
\'93Very well.\'94\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by, my angel. You stood up for me, just now. I shall never forget\
it. I\'92ve a word to say to you to\uc0\u8208 morrow\'97but I must think about it.\'94\
\
\'93And how do you feel now?\'94\
\
\'93I shall get up to\uc0\u8208 morrow and go out, perfectly well, perfectly well!\'94\
\
Crossing the yard Alyosha found Ivan sitting on the bench at the gateway.\
He was sitting writing something in pencil in his note\uc0\u8208 book. Alyosha told\
Ivan that their father had waked up, was conscious, and had let him go\
back to sleep at the monastery.\
\
\'93Alyosha, I should be very glad to meet you to\uc0\u8208 morrow morning,\'94 said Ivan\
cordially, standing up. His cordiality was a complete surprise to Alyosha.\
\
\'93I shall be at the Hohlakovs\'92 to\uc0\u8208 morrow,\'94 answered Alyosha, \'93I may be at\
Katerina Ivanovna\'92s, too, if I don\'92t find her now.\'94\
\
\'93But you\'92re going to her now, anyway? For that \'91compliments and\
farewell,\'92 \'94 said Ivan smiling. Alyosha was disconcerted.\
\
\'93I think I quite understand his exclamations just now, and part of what\
went before. Dmitri has asked you to go to her and say that he\'97well, in\
fact\'97takes his leave of her?\'94\
\
\'93Brother, how will all this horror end between father and Dmitri?\'94\
exclaimed Alyosha.\
\
\'93One can\'92t tell for certain. Perhaps in nothing: it may all fizzle out.\
That woman is a beast. In any case we must keep the old man indoors and\
not let Dmitri in the house.\'94\
\
\'93Brother, let me ask one thing more: has any man a right to look at other\
men and decide which is worthy to live?\'94\
\
\'93Why bring in the question of worth? The matter is most often decided in\
men\'92s hearts on other grounds much more natural. And as for rights\'97who has\
not the right to wish?\'94\
\
\'93Not for another man\'92s death?\'94\
\
\'93What even if for another man\'92s death? Why lie to oneself since all men\
live so and perhaps cannot help living so. Are you referring to what I\
said just now\'97that one reptile will devour the other? In that case let me\
ask you, do you think me like Dmitri capable of shedding \'c6sop\'92s blood,\
murdering him, eh?\'94\
\
\'93What are you saying, Ivan? Such an idea never crossed my mind. I don\'92t\
think Dmitri is capable of it, either.\'94\
\
\'93Thanks, if only for that,\'94 smiled Ivan. \'93Be sure, I should always defend\
him. But in my wishes I reserve myself full latitude in this case. Good\uc0\u8208 by\
till to\uc0\u8208 morrow. Don\'92t condemn me, and don\'92t look on me as a villain,\'94 he\
added with a smile.\
\
They shook hands warmly as they had never done before. Alyosha felt that\
his brother had taken the first step towards him, and that he had\
certainly done this with some definite motive.\
\
\
\
Chapter X. Both Together\
\
\
Alyosha left his father\'92s house feeling even more exhausted and dejected\
in spirit than when he had entered it. His mind too seemed shattered and\
unhinged, while he felt that he was afraid to put together the disjointed\
fragments and form a general idea from all the agonizing and conflicting\
experiences of the day. He felt something bordering upon despair, which he\
had never known till then. Towering like a mountain above all the rest\
stood the fatal, insoluble question: How would things end between his\
father and his brother Dmitri with this terrible woman? Now he had himself\
been a witness of it, he had been present and seen them face to face. Yet\
only his brother Dmitri could be made unhappy, terribly, completely\
unhappy: there was trouble awaiting him. It appeared too that there were\
other people concerned, far more so than Alyosha could have supposed\
before. There was something positively mysterious in it, too. Ivan had\
made a step towards him, which was what Alyosha had been long desiring.\
Yet now he felt for some reason that he was frightened at it. And these\
women? Strange to say, that morning he had set out for Katerina Ivanovna\'92s\
in the greatest embarrassment; now he felt nothing of the kind. On the\
contrary, he was hastening there as though expecting to find guidance from\
her. Yet to give her this message was obviously more difficult than\
before. The matter of the three thousand was decided irrevocably, and\
Dmitri, feeling himself dishonored and losing his last hope, might sink to\
any depth. He had, moreover, told him to describe to Katerina Ivanovna the\
scene which had just taken place with his father.\
\
It was by now seven o\'92clock, and it was getting dark as Alyosha entered\
the very spacious and convenient house in the High Street occupied by\
Katerina Ivanovna. Alyosha knew that she lived with two aunts. One of\
them, a woman of little education, was that aunt of her half\uc0\u8208 sister Agafya\
Ivanovna who had looked after her in her father\'92s house when she came from\
boarding\uc0\u8208 school. The other aunt was a Moscow lady of style and\
consequence, though in straitened circumstances. It was said that they\
both gave way in everything to Katerina Ivanovna, and that she only kept\
them with her as chaperons. Katerina Ivanovna herself gave way to no one\
but her benefactress, the general\'92s widow, who had been kept by illness in\
Moscow, and to whom she was obliged to write twice a week a full account\
of all her doings.\
\
When Alyosha entered the hall and asked the maid who opened the door to\
him to take his name up, it was evident that they were already aware of\
his arrival. Possibly he had been noticed from the window. At least,\
Alyosha heard a noise, caught the sound of flying footsteps and rustling\
skirts. Two or three women, perhaps, had run out of the room.\
\
Alyosha thought it strange that his arrival should cause such excitement.\
He was conducted however to the drawing\uc0\u8208 room at once. It was a large room,\
elegantly and amply furnished, not at all in provincial style. There were\
many sofas, lounges, settees, big and little tables. There were pictures\
on the walls, vases and lamps on the tables, masses of flowers, and even\
an aquarium in the window. It was twilight and rather dark. Alyosha made\
out a silk mantle thrown down on the sofa, where people had evidently just\
been sitting; and on a table in front of the sofa were two unfinished cups\
of chocolate, cakes, a glass saucer with blue raisins, and another with\
sweetmeats. Alyosha saw that he had interrupted visitors, and frowned. But\
at that instant the porti\'e8re was raised, and with rapid, hurrying\
footsteps Katerina Ivanovna came in, holding out both hands to Alyosha\
with a radiant smile of delight. At the same instant a servant brought in\
two lighted candles and set them on the table.\
\
\'93Thank God! At last you have come too! I\'92ve been simply praying for you\
all day! Sit down.\'94\
\
Alyosha had been struck by Katerina Ivanovna\'92s beauty when, three weeks\
before, Dmitri had first brought him, at Katerina Ivanovna\'92s special\
request, to be introduced to her. There had been no conversation between\
them at that interview, however. Supposing Alyosha to be very shy,\
Katerina Ivanovna had talked all the time to Dmitri to spare him. Alyosha\
had been silent, but he had seen a great deal very clearly. He was struck\
by the imperiousness, proud ease, and self\uc0\u8208 confidence of the haughty girl.\
And all that was certain, Alyosha felt that he was not exaggerating it. He\
thought her great glowing black eyes were very fine, especially with her\
pale, even rather sallow, longish face. But in those eyes and in the lines\
of her exquisite lips there was something with which his brother might\
well be passionately in love, but which perhaps could not be loved for\
long. He expressed this thought almost plainly to Dmitri when, after the\
visit, his brother besought and insisted that he should not conceal his\
impressions on seeing his betrothed.\
\
\'93You\'92ll be happy with her, but perhaps\'97not tranquilly happy.\'94\
\
\'93Quite so, brother. Such people remain always the same. They don\'92t yield\
to fate. So you think I shan\'92t love her for ever.\'94\
\
\'93No; perhaps you will love her for ever. But perhaps you won\'92t always be\
happy with her.\'94\
\
Alyosha had given his opinion at the time, blushing, and angry with\
himself for having yielded to his brother\'92s entreaties and put such\
\'93foolish\'94 ideas into words. For his opinion had struck him as awfully\
foolish immediately after he had uttered it. He felt ashamed too of having\
given so confident an opinion about a woman. It was with the more\
amazement that he felt now, at the first glance at Katerina Ivanovna as\
she ran in to him, that he had perhaps been utterly mistaken. This time\
her face was beaming with spontaneous good\uc0\u8208 natured kindliness, and direct\
warm\uc0\u8208 hearted sincerity. The \'93pride and haughtiness,\'94 which had struck\
Alyosha so much before, was only betrayed now in a frank, generous energy\
and a sort of bright, strong faith in herself. Alyosha realized at the\
first glance, at the first word, that all the tragedy of her position in\
relation to the man she loved so dearly was no secret to her; that she\
perhaps already knew everything, positively everything. And yet, in spite\
of that, there was such brightness in her face, such faith in the future.\
Alyosha felt at once that he had gravely wronged her in his thoughts. He\
was conquered and captivated immediately. Besides all this, he noticed at\
her first words that she was in great excitement, an excitement perhaps\
quite exceptional and almost approaching ecstasy.\
\
\'93I was so eager to see you, because I can learn from you the whole\
truth\'97from you and no one else.\'94\
\
\'93I have come,\'94 muttered Alyosha confusedly, \'93I\'97he sent me.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, he sent you! I foresaw that. Now I know everything\'97everything!\'94 cried\
Katerina Ivanovna, her eyes flashing. \'93Wait a moment, Alexey Fyodorovitch,\
I\'92ll tell you why I\'92ve been so longing to see you. You see, I know perhaps\
far more than you do yourself, and there\'92s no need for you to tell me\
anything. I\'92ll tell you what I want from you. I want to know your own last\
impression of him. I want you to tell me most directly, plainly, coarsely\
even (oh, as coarsely as you like!), what you thought of him just now and\
of his position after your meeting with him to\uc0\u8208 day. That will perhaps be\
better than if I had a personal explanation with him, as he does not want\
to come to me. Do you understand what I want from you? Now, tell me\
simply, tell me every word of the message he sent you with (I knew he\
would send you).\'94\
\
\'93He told me to give you his compliments\'97and to say that he would never\
come again\'97but to give you his compliments.\'94\
\
\'93His compliments? Was that what he said\'97his own expression?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93Accidentally perhaps he made a mistake in the word, perhaps he did not\
use the right word?\'94\
\
\'93No; he told me precisely to repeat that word. He begged me two or three\
times not to forget to say so.\'94\
\
Katerina Ivanovna flushed hotly.\
\
\'93Help me now, Alexey Fyodorovitch. Now I really need your help. I\'92ll tell\
you what I think, and you must simply say whether it\'92s right or not.\
Listen! If he had sent me his compliments in passing, without insisting on\
your repeating the words, without emphasizing them, that would be the end\
of everything! But if he particularly insisted on those words, if he\
particularly told you not to forget to repeat them to me, then perhaps he\
was in excitement, beside himself. He had made his decision and was\
frightened at it. He wasn\'92t walking away from me with a resolute step, but\
leaping headlong. The emphasis on that phrase may have been simply\
bravado.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, yes!\'94 cried Alyosha warmly. \'93I believe that is it.\'94\
\
\'93And, if so, he\'92s not altogether lost. I can still save him. Stay! Did he\
not tell you anything about money\'97about three thousand roubles?\'94\
\
\'93He did speak about it, and it\'92s that more than anything that\'92s crushing\
him. He said he had lost his honor and that nothing matters now,\'94 Alyosha\
answered warmly, feeling a rush of hope in his heart and believing that\
there really might be a way of escape and salvation for his brother. \'93But\
do you know about the money?\'94 he added, and suddenly broke off.\
\
\'93I\'92ve known of it a long time; I telegraphed to Moscow to inquire, and\
heard long ago that the money had not arrived. He hadn\'92t sent the money,\
but I said nothing. Last week I learnt that he was still in need of money.\
My only object in all this was that he should know to whom to turn, and\
who was his true friend. No, he won\'92t recognize that I am his truest\
friend; he won\'92t know me, and looks on me merely as a woman. I\'92ve been\
tormented all the week, trying to think how to prevent him from being\
ashamed to face me because he spent that three thousand. Let him feel\
ashamed of himself, let him be ashamed of other people\'92s knowing, but not\
of my knowing. He can tell God everything without shame. Why is it he\
still does not understand how much I am ready to bear for his sake? Why,\
why doesn\'92t he know me? How dare he not know me after all that has\
happened? I want to save him for ever. Let him forget me as his betrothed.\
And here he fears that he is dishonored in my eyes. Why, he wasn\'92t afraid\
to be open with you, Alexey Fyodorovitch. How is it that I don\'92t deserve\
the same?\'94\
\
The last words she uttered in tears. Tears gushed from her eyes.\
\
\'93I must tell you,\'94 Alyosha began, his voice trembling too, \'93what happened\
just now between him and my father.\'94\
\
And he described the whole scene, how Dmitri had sent him to get the\
money, how he had broken in, knocked his father down, and after that had\
again specially and emphatically begged him to take his compliments and\
farewell. \'93He went to that woman,\'94 Alyosha added softly.\
\
\'93And do you suppose that I can\'92t put up with that woman? Does he think I\
can\'92t? But he won\'92t marry her,\'94 she suddenly laughed nervously. \'93Could\
such a passion last for ever in a Karamazov? It\'92s passion, not love. He\
won\'92t marry her because she won\'92t marry him.\'94 Again Katerina Ivanovna\
laughed strangely.\
\
\'93He may marry her,\'94 said Alyosha mournfully, looking down.\
\
\'93He won\'92t marry her, I tell you. That girl is an angel. Do you know that?\
Do you know that?\'94 Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed suddenly with extraordinary\
warmth. \'93She is one of the most fantastic of fantastic creatures. I know\
how bewitching she is, but I know too that she is kind, firm and noble.\
Why do you look at me like that, Alexey Fyodorovitch? Perhaps you are\
wondering at my words, perhaps you don\'92t believe me? Agrafena\
Alexandrovna, my angel!\'94 she cried suddenly to some one, peeping into the\
next room, \'93come in to us. This is a friend. This is Alyosha. He knows all\
about our affairs. Show yourself to him.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve only been waiting behind the curtain for you to call me,\'94 said a\
soft, one might even say sugary, feminine voice.\
\
The porti\'e8re was raised and Grushenka herself, smiling and beaming, came\
up to the table. A violent revulsion passed over Alyosha. He fixed his\
eyes on her and could not take them off. Here she was, that awful woman,\
the \'93beast,\'94 as Ivan had called her half an hour before. And yet one would\
have thought the creature standing before him most simple and ordinary, a\
good\uc0\u8208 natured, kind woman, handsome certainly, but so like other handsome\
ordinary women! It is true she was very, very good\uc0\u8208 looking with that\
Russian beauty so passionately loved by many men. She was a rather tall\
woman, though a little shorter than Katerina Ivanovna, who was\
exceptionally tall. She had a full figure, with soft, as it were,\
noiseless, movements, softened to a peculiar over\uc0\u8208 sweetness, like her\
voice. She moved, not like Katerina Ivanovna, with a vigorous, bold step,\
but noiselessly. Her feet made absolutely no sound on the floor. She sank\
softly into a low chair, softly rustling her sumptuous black silk dress,\
and delicately nestling her milk\uc0\u8208 white neck and broad shoulders in a\
costly cashmere shawl. She was twenty\uc0\u8208 two years old, and her face looked\
exactly that age. She was very white in the face, with a pale pink tint on\
her cheeks. The modeling of her face might be said to be too broad, and\
the lower jaw was set a trifle forward. Her upper lip was thin, but the\
slightly prominent lower lip was at least twice as full, and looked\
pouting. But her magnificent, abundant dark brown hair, her sable\uc0\u8208 colored\
eyebrows and charming gray\uc0\u8208 blue eyes with their long lashes would have\
made the most indifferent person, meeting her casually in a crowd in the\
street, stop at the sight of her face and remember it long after. What\
struck Alyosha most in that face was its expression of childlike good\
nature. There was a childlike look in her eyes, a look of childish\
delight. She came up to the table, beaming with delight and seeming to\
expect something with childish, impatient, and confiding curiosity. The\
light in her eyes gladdened the soul\'97Alyosha felt that. There was\
something else in her which he could not understand, or would not have\
been able to define, and which yet perhaps unconsciously affected him. It\
was that softness, that voluptuousness of her bodily movements, that\
catlike noiselessness. Yet it was a vigorous, ample body. Under the shawl\
could be seen full broad shoulders, a high, still quite girlish bosom. Her\
figure suggested the lines of the Venus of Milo, though already in\
somewhat exaggerated proportions. That could be divined. Connoisseurs of\
Russian beauty could have foretold with certainty that this fresh, still\
youthful beauty would lose its harmony by the age of thirty, would\
\'93spread\'94; that the face would become puffy, and that wrinkles would very\
soon appear upon her forehead and round the eyes; the complexion would\
grow coarse and red perhaps\'97in fact, that it was the beauty of the moment,\
the fleeting beauty which is so often met with in Russian women. Alyosha,\
of course, did not think of this; but though he was fascinated, yet he\
wondered with an unpleasant sensation, and as it were regretfully, why she\
drawled in that way and could not speak naturally. She did so evidently\
feeling there was a charm in the exaggerated, honeyed modulation of the\
syllables. It was, of course, only a bad, underbred habit that showed bad\
education and a false idea of good manners. And yet this intonation and\
manner of speaking impressed Alyosha as almost incredibly incongruous with\
the childishly simple and happy expression of her face, the soft, babyish\
joy in her eyes. Katerina Ivanovna at once made her sit down in an arm\uc0\u8208 \
chair facing Alyosha, and ecstatically kissed her several times on her\
smiling lips. She seemed quite in love with her.\
\
\'93This is the first time we\'92ve met, Alexey Fyodorovitch,\'94 she said\
rapturously. \'93I wanted to know her, to see her. I wanted to go to her, but\
I\'92d no sooner expressed the wish than she came to me. I knew we should\
settle everything together\'97everything. My heart told me so\'97I was begged\
not to take the step, but I foresaw it would be a way out of the\
difficulty, and I was not mistaken. Grushenka has explained everything to\
me, told me all she means to do. She flew here like an angel of goodness\
and brought us peace and joy.\'94\
\
\'93You did not disdain me, sweet, excellent young lady,\'94 drawled Grushenka\
in her sing\uc0\u8208 song voice, still with the same charming smile of delight.\
\
\'93Don\'92t dare to speak to me like that, you sorceress, you witch! Disdain\
you! Here, I must kiss your lower lip once more. It looks as though it\
were swollen, and now it will be more so, and more and more. Look how she\
laughs, Alexey Fyodorovitch! It does one\'92s heart good to see the angel.\'94\
\
Alyosha flushed, and faint, imperceptible shivers kept running down him.\
\
\'93You make so much of me, dear young lady, and perhaps I am not at all\
worthy of your kindness.\'94\
\
\'93Not worthy! She\'92s not worthy of it!\'94 Katerina Ivanovna cried again with\
the same warmth. \'93You know, Alexey Fyodorovitch, we\'92re fanciful, we\'92re\
self\uc0\u8208 willed, but proudest of the proud in our little heart. We\'92re noble,\
we\'92re generous, Alexey Fyodorovitch, let me tell you. We have only been\
unfortunate. We were too ready to make every sacrifice for an unworthy,\
perhaps, or fickle man. There was one man\'97one, an officer too, we loved\
him, we sacrificed everything to him. That was long ago, five years ago,\
and he has forgotten us, he has married. Now he is a widower, he has\
written, he is coming here, and, do you know, we\'92ve loved him, none but\
him, all this time, and we\'92ve loved him all our life! He will come, and\
Grushenka will be happy again. For the last five years she\'92s been\
wretched. But who can reproach her, who can boast of her favor? Only that\
bedridden old merchant, but he is more like her father, her friend, her\
protector. He found her then in despair, in agony, deserted by the man she\
loved. She was ready to drown herself then, but the old merchant saved\
her\'97saved her!\'94\
\
\'93You defend me very kindly, dear young lady. You are in a great hurry\
about everything,\'94 Grushenka drawled again.\
\
\'93Defend you! Is it for me to defend you? Should I dare to defend you?\
Grushenka, angel, give me your hand. Look at that charming soft little\
hand, Alexey Fyodorovitch! Look at it! It has brought me happiness and has\
lifted me up, and I\'92m going to kiss it, outside and inside, here, here,\
here!\'94\
\
And three times she kissed the certainly charming, though rather fat, hand\
of Grushenka in a sort of rapture. She held out her hand with a charming\
musical, nervous little laugh, watched the \'93sweet young lady,\'94 and\
obviously liked having her hand kissed.\
\
\'93Perhaps there\'92s rather too much rapture,\'94 thought Alyosha. He blushed. He\
felt a peculiar uneasiness at heart the whole time.\
\
\'93You won\'92t make me blush, dear young lady, kissing my hand like this\
before Alexey Fyodorovitch.\'94\
\
\'93Do you think I meant to make you blush?\'94 said Katerina Ivanovna, somewhat\
surprised. \'93Ah, my dear, how little you understand me!\'94\
\
\'93Yes, and you too perhaps quite misunderstand me, dear young lady. Maybe\
I\'92m not so good as I seem to you. I\'92ve a bad heart; I will have my own\
way. I fascinated poor Dmitri Fyodorovitch that day simply for fun.\'94\
\
\'93But now you\'92ll save him. You\'92ve given me your word. You\'92ll explain it all\
to him. You\'92ll break to him that you have long loved another man, who is\
now offering you his hand.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no! I didn\'92t give you my word to do that. It was you kept talking\
about that. I didn\'92t give you my word.\'94\
\
\'93Then I didn\'92t quite understand you,\'94 said Katerina Ivanovna slowly,\
turning a little pale. \'93You promised\'97\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no, angel lady, I\'92ve promised nothing,\'94 Grushenka interrupted softly\
and evenly, still with the same gay and simple expression. \'93You see at\
once, dear young lady, what a willful wretch I am compared with you. If I\
want to do a thing I do it. I may have made you some promise just now. But\
now again I\'92m thinking: I may take to Mitya again. I liked him very much\
once\'97liked him for almost a whole hour. Now maybe I shall go and tell him\
to stay with me from this day forward. You see, I\'92m so changeable.\'94\
\
\'93Just now you said\'97something quite different,\'94 Katerina Ivanovna whispered\
faintly.\
\
\'93Ah, just now! But, you know. I\'92m such a soft\uc0\u8208 hearted, silly creature.\
Only think what he\'92s gone through on my account! What if when I go home I\
feel sorry for him? What then?\'94\
\
\'93I never expected\'97\'94\
\
\'93Ah, young lady, how good and generous you are compared with me! Now\
perhaps you won\'92t care for a silly creature like me, now you know my\
character. Give me your sweet little hand, angelic lady,\'94 she said\
tenderly, and with a sort of reverence took Katerina Ivanovna\'92s hand.\
\
\'93Here, dear young lady, I\'92ll take your hand and kiss it as you did mine.\
You kissed mine three times, but I ought to kiss yours three hundred times\
to be even with you. Well, but let that pass. And then it shall be as God\
wills. Perhaps I shall be your slave entirely and want to do your bidding\
like a slave. Let it be as God wills, without any agreements and promises.\
What a sweet hand\'97what a sweet hand you have! You sweet young lady, you\
incredible beauty!\'94\
\
She slowly raised the hands to her lips, with the strange object indeed of\
\'93being even\'94 with her in kisses.\
\
Katerina Ivanovna did not take her hand away. She listened with timid hope\
to the last words, though Grushenka\'92s promise to do her bidding like a\
slave was very strangely expressed. She looked intently into her eyes; she\
still saw in those eyes the same simple\uc0\u8208 hearted, confiding expression, the\
same bright gayety.\
\
\'93She\'92s perhaps too na\'efve,\'94 thought Katerina Ivanovna, with a gleam of\
hope.\
\
Grushenka meanwhile seemed enthusiastic over the \'93sweet hand.\'94 She raised\
it deliberately to her lips. But she held it for two or three minutes near\
her lips, as though reconsidering something.\
\
\'93Do you know, angel lady,\'94 she suddenly drawled in an even more soft and\
sugary voice, \'93do you know, after all, I think I won\'92t kiss your hand?\'94\
And she laughed a little merry laugh.\
\
\'93As you please. What\'92s the matter with you?\'94 said Katerina Ivanovna,\
starting suddenly.\
\
\'93So that you may be left to remember that you kissed my hand, but I didn\'92t\
kiss yours.\'94\
\
There was a sudden gleam in her eyes. She looked with awful intentness at\
Katerina Ivanovna.\
\
\'93Insolent creature!\'94 cried Katerina Ivanovna, as though suddenly grasping\
something. She flushed all over and leapt up from her seat.\
\
Grushenka too got up, but without haste.\
\
\'93So I shall tell Mitya how you kissed my hand, but I didn\'92t kiss yours at\
all. And how he will laugh!\'94\
\
\'93Vile slut! Go away!\'94\
\
\'93Ah, for shame, young lady! Ah, for shame! That\'92s unbecoming for you, dear\
young lady, a word like that.\'94\
\
\'93Go away! You\'92re a creature for sale!\'94 screamed Katerina Ivanovna. Every\
feature was working in her utterly distorted face.\
\
\'93For sale indeed! You used to visit gentlemen in the dusk for money once;\
you brought your beauty for sale. You see, I know.\'94\
\
Katerina Ivanovna shrieked, and would have rushed at her, but Alyosha held\
her with all his strength.\
\
\'93Not a step, not a word! Don\'92t speak, don\'92t answer her. She\'92ll go\
away\'97she\'92ll go at once.\'94\
\
At that instant Katerina Ivanovna\'92s two aunts ran in at her cry, and with\
them a maid\uc0\u8208 servant. All hurried to her.\
\
\'93I will go away,\'94 said Grushenka, taking up her mantle from the sofa.\
\'93Alyosha, darling, see me home!\'94\
\
\'93Go away\'97go away, make haste!\'94 cried Alyosha, clasping his hands\
imploringly.\
\
\'93Dear little Alyosha, see me home! I\'92ve got a pretty little story to tell\
you on the way. I got up this scene for your benefit, Alyosha. See me\
home, dear, you\'92ll be glad of it afterwards.\'94\
\
Alyosha turned away, wringing his hands. Grushenka ran out of the house,\
laughing musically.\
\
Katerina Ivanovna went into a fit of hysterics. She sobbed, and was shaken\
with convulsions. Every one fussed round her.\
\
\'93I warned you,\'94 said the elder of her aunts. \'93I tried to prevent your\
doing this. You\'92re too impulsive. How could you do such a thing? You don\'92t\
know these creatures, and they say she\'92s worse than any of them. You are\
too self\uc0\u8208 willed.\'94\
\
\'93She\'92s a tigress!\'94 yelled Katerina Ivanovna. \'93Why did you hold me, Alexey\
Fyodorovitch? I\'92d have beaten her\'97beaten her!\'94\
\
She could not control herself before Alyosha; perhaps she did not care to,\
indeed.\
\
\'93She ought to be flogged in public on a scaffold!\'94\
\
Alyosha withdrew towards the door.\
\
\'93But, my God!\'94 cried Katerina Ivanovna, clasping her hands. \'93He! He! He\
could be so dishonorable, so inhuman! Why, he told that creature what\
happened on that fatal, accursed day! \'91You brought your beauty for sale,\
dear young lady.\'92 She knows it! Your brother\'92s a scoundrel, Alexey\
Fyodorovitch.\'94\
\
Alyosha wanted to say something, but he couldn\'92t find a word. His heart\
ached.\
\
\'93Go away, Alexey Fyodorovitch! It\'92s shameful, it\'92s awful for me! To\uc0\u8208 \
morrow, I beg you on my knees, come to\uc0\u8208 morrow. Don\'92t condemn me. Forgive\
me. I don\'92t know what I shall do with myself now!\'94\
\
Alyosha walked out into the street reeling. He could have wept as she did.\
Suddenly he was overtaken by the maid.\
\
\'93The young lady forgot to give you this letter from Madame Hohlakov; it\'92s\
been left with us since dinner\uc0\u8208 time.\'94\
\
Alyosha took the little pink envelope mechanically and put it, almost\
unconsciously, into his pocket.\
\
\
\
Chapter XI. Another Reputation Ruined\
\
\
It was not much more than three\uc0\u8208 quarters of a mile from the town to the\
monastery. Alyosha walked quickly along the road, at that hour deserted.\
It was almost night, and too dark to see anything clearly at thirty paces\
ahead. There were cross\uc0\u8208 roads half\u8208 way. A figure came into sight under a\
solitary willow at the cross\uc0\u8208 roads. As soon as Alyosha reached the cross\u8208 \
roads the figure moved out and rushed at him, shouting savagely:\
\
\'93Your money or your life!\'94\
\
\'93So it\'92s you, Mitya,\'94 cried Alyosha, in surprise, violently startled\
however.\
\
\'93Ha ha ha! You didn\'92t expect me? I wondered where to wait for you. By her\
house? There are three ways from it, and I might have missed you. At last\
I thought of waiting here, for you had to pass here, there\'92s no other way\
to the monastery. Come, tell me the truth. Crush me like a beetle. But\
what\'92s the matter?\'94\
\
\'93Nothing, brother\'97it\'92s the fright you gave me. Oh, Dmitri! Father\'92s blood\
just now.\'94 (Alyosha began to cry, he had been on the verge of tears for a\
long time, and now something seemed to snap in his soul.) \'93You almost\
killed him\'97cursed him\'97and now\'97here\'97you\'92re making jokes\'97\'91Your money or your\
life!\'92 \'94\
\
\'93Well, what of that? It\'92s not seemly\'97is that it? Not suitable in my\
position?\'94\
\
\'93No\'97I only\'97\'94\
\
\'93Stay. Look at the night. You see what a dark night, what clouds, what a\
wind has risen. I hid here under the willow waiting for you. And as God\'92s\
above, I suddenly thought, why go on in misery any longer, what is there\
to wait for? Here I have a willow, a handkerchief, a shirt, I can twist\
them into a rope in a minute, and braces besides, and why go on burdening\
the earth, dishonoring it with my vile presence? And then I heard you\
coming\'97Heavens, it was as though something flew down to me suddenly. So\
there is a man, then, whom I love. Here he is, that man, my dear little\
brother, whom I love more than any one in the world, the only one I love\
in the world. And I loved you so much, so much at that moment that I\
thought, \'91I\'92ll fall on his neck at once.\'92 Then a stupid idea struck me, to\
have a joke with you and scare you. I shouted, like a fool, \'91Your money!\'92\
Forgive my foolery\'97it was only nonsense, and there\'92s nothing unseemly in\
my soul.... Damn it all, tell me what\'92s happened. What did she say? Strike\
me, crush me, don\'92t spare me! Was she furious?\'94\
\
\'93No, not that.... There was nothing like that, Mitya. There\'97I found them\
both there.\'94\
\
\'93Both? Whom?\'94\
\
\'93Grushenka at Katerina Ivanovna\'92s.\'94\
\
Dmitri was struck dumb.\
\
\'93Impossible!\'94 he cried. \'93You\'92re raving! Grushenka with her?\'94\
\
Alyosha described all that had happened from the moment he went in to\
Katerina Ivanovna\'92s. He was ten minutes telling his story. He can\'92t be\
said to have told it fluently and consecutively, but he seemed to make it\
clear, not omitting any word or action of significance, and vividly\
describing, often in one word, his own sensations. Dmitri listened in\
silence, gazing at him with a terrible fixed stare, but it was clear to\
Alyosha that he understood it all, and had grasped every point. But as the\
story went on, his face became not merely gloomy, but menacing. He\
scowled, he clenched his teeth, and his fixed stare became still more\
rigid, more concentrated, more terrible, when suddenly, with incredible\
rapidity, his wrathful, savage face changed, his tightly compressed lips\
parted, and Dmitri Fyodorovitch broke into uncontrolled, spontaneous\
laughter. He literally shook with laughter. For a long time he could not\
speak.\
\
\'93So she wouldn\'92t kiss her hand! So she didn\'92t kiss it; so she ran away!\'94\
he kept exclaiming with hysterical delight; insolent delight it might have\
been called, if it had not been so spontaneous. \'93So the other one called\
her tigress! And a tigress she is! So she ought to be flogged on a\
scaffold? Yes, yes, so she ought. That\'92s just what I think; she ought to\
have been long ago. It\'92s like this, brother, let her be punished, but I\
must get better first. I understand the queen of impudence. That\'92s her all\
over! You saw her all over in that hand\uc0\u8208 kissing, the she\u8208 devil! She\'92s\
magnificent in her own line! So she ran home? I\'92ll go\'97ah\'97I\'92ll run to her!\
Alyosha, don\'92t blame me, I agree that hanging is too good for her.\'94\
\
\'93But Katerina Ivanovna!\'94 exclaimed Alyosha sorrowfully.\
\
\'93I see her, too! I see right through her, as I\'92ve never done before! It\'92s\
a regular discovery of the four continents of the world, that is, of the\
five! What a thing to do! That\'92s just like Katya, who was not afraid to\
face a coarse, unmannerly officer and risk a deadly insult on a generous\
impulse to save her father! But the pride, the recklessness, the defiance\
of fate, the unbounded defiance! You say that aunt tried to stop her? That\
aunt, you know, is overbearing, herself. She\'92s the sister of the general\'92s\
widow in Moscow, and even more stuck\uc0\u8208 up than she. But her husband was\
caught stealing government money. He lost everything, his estate and all,\
and the proud wife had to lower her colors, and hasn\'92t raised them since.\
So she tried to prevent Katya, but she wouldn\'92t listen to her! She thinks\
she can overcome everything, that everything will give way to her. She\
thought she could bewitch Grushenka if she liked, and she believed it\
herself: she plays a part to herself, and whose fault is it? Do you think\
she kissed Grushenka\'92s hand first, on purpose, with a motive? No, she\
really was fascinated by Grushenka, that\'92s to say, not by Grushenka, but\
by her own dream, her own delusion\'97because it was _her_ dream, _her_\
delusion! Alyosha, darling, how did you escape from them, those women? Did\
you pick up your cassock and run? Ha ha ha!\'94\
\
\'93Brother, you don\'92t seem to have noticed how you\'92ve insulted Katerina\
Ivanovna by telling Grushenka about that day. And she flung it in her face\
just now that she had gone to gentlemen in secret to sell her beauty!\
Brother, what could be worse than that insult?\'94\
\
What worried Alyosha more than anything was that, incredible as it seemed,\
his brother appeared pleased at Katerina Ivanovna\'92s humiliation.\
\
\'93Bah!\'94 Dmitri frowned fiercely, and struck his forehead with his hand. He\
only now realized it, though Alyosha had just told him of the insult, and\
Katerina Ivanovna\'92s cry: \'93Your brother is a scoundrel!\'94\
\
\'93Yes, perhaps, I really did tell Grushenka about that \'91fatal day,\'92 as\
Katya calls it. Yes, I did tell her, I remember! It was that time at\
Mokroe. I was drunk, the gypsies were singing.... But I was sobbing. I was\
sobbing then, kneeling and praying to Katya\'92s image, and Grushenka\
understood it. She understood it all then. I remember, she cried\
herself.... Damn it all! But it\'92s bound to be so now.... Then she cried,\
but now \'91the dagger in the heart\'92! That\'92s how women are.\'94\
\
He looked down and sank into thought.\
\
\'93Yes, I am a scoundrel, a thorough scoundrel!\'94 he said suddenly, in a\
gloomy voice. \'93It doesn\'92t matter whether I cried or not, I\'92m a scoundrel!\
Tell her I accept the name, if that\'92s any comfort. Come, that\'92s enough.\
Good\uc0\u8208 by. It\'92s no use talking! It\'92s not amusing. You go your way and I\
mine. And I don\'92t want to see you again except as a last resource. Good\uc0\u8208 \
by, Alexey!\'94\
\
He warmly pressed Alyosha\'92s hand, and still looking down, without raising\
his head, as though tearing himself away, turned rapidly towards the town.\
\
Alyosha looked after him, unable to believe he would go away so abruptly.\
\
\'93Stay, Alexey, one more confession to you alone!\'94 cried Dmitri, suddenly\
turning back. \'93Look at me. Look at me well. You see here, here\'97there\'92s\
terrible disgrace in store for me.\'94 (As he said \'93here,\'94 Dmitri struck his\
chest with his fist with a strange air, as though the dishonor lay\
precisely on his chest, in some spot, in a pocket, perhaps, or hanging\
round his neck.) \'93You know me now, a scoundrel, an avowed scoundrel, but\
let me tell you that I\'92ve never done anything before and never shall\
again, anything that can compare in baseness with the dishonor which I\
bear now at this very minute on my breast, here, here, which will come to\
pass, though I\'92m perfectly free to stop it. I can stop it or carry it\
through, note that. Well, let me tell you, I shall carry it through. I\
shan\'92t stop it. I told you everything just now, but I didn\'92t tell you\
this, because even I had not brass enough for it. I can still pull up; if\
I do, I can give back the full half of my lost honor to\uc0\u8208 morrow. But I\
shan\'92t pull up. I shall carry out my base plan, and you can bear witness\
that I told you so beforehand. Darkness and destruction! No need to\
explain. You\'92ll find out in due time. The filthy back\uc0\u8208 alley and the she\u8208 \
devil. Good\uc0\u8208 by. Don\'92t pray for me, I\'92m not worth it. And there\'92s no need,\
no need at all.... I don\'92t need it! Away!\'94\
\
And he suddenly retreated, this time finally. Alyosha went towards the\
monastery.\
\
\'93What? I shall never see him again! What is he saying?\'94 he wondered\
wildly. \'93Why, I shall certainly see him to\uc0\u8208 morrow. I shall look him up. I\
shall make a point of it. What does he mean?\'94\
\
                  \uc0\u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \
\
He went round the monastery, and crossed the pine\uc0\u8208 wood to the hermitage.\
The door was opened to him, though no one was admitted at that hour. There\
was a tremor in his heart as he went into Father Zossima\'92s cell.\
\
\'93Why, why, had he gone forth? Why had he sent him into the world? Here was\
peace. Here was holiness. But there was confusion, there was darkness in\
which one lost one\'92s way and went astray at once....\'94\
\
In the cell he found the novice Porfiry and Father Pa\'efssy, who came every\
hour to inquire after Father Zossima. Alyosha learnt with alarm that he\
was getting worse and worse. Even his usual discourse with the brothers\
could not take place that day. As a rule every evening after service the\
monks flocked into Father Zossima\'92s cell, and all confessed aloud their\
sins of the day, their sinful thoughts and temptations; even their\
disputes, if there had been any. Some confessed kneeling. The elder\
absolved, reconciled, exhorted, imposed penance, blessed, and dismissed\
them. It was against this general \'93confession\'94 that the opponents of\
\'93elders\'94 protested, maintaining that it was a profanation of the sacrament\
of confession, almost a sacrilege, though this was quite a different\
thing. They even represented to the diocesan authorities that such\
confessions attained no good object, but actually to a large extent led to\
sin and temptation. Many of the brothers disliked going to the elder, and\
went against their own will because every one went, and for fear they\
should be accused of pride and rebellious ideas. People said that some of\
the monks agreed beforehand, saying, \'93I\'92ll confess I lost my temper with\
you this morning, and you confirm it,\'94 simply in order to have something\
to say. Alyosha knew that this actually happened sometimes. He knew, too,\
that there were among the monks some who deeply resented the fact that\
letters from relations were habitually taken to the elder, to be opened\
and read by him before those to whom they were addressed.\
\
It was assumed, of course, that all this was done freely, and in good\
faith, by way of voluntary submission and salutary guidance. But, in fact,\
there was sometimes no little insincerity, and much that was false and\
strained in this practice. Yet the older and more experienced of the monks\
adhered to their opinion, arguing that \'93for those who have come within\
these walls sincerely seeking salvation, such obedience and sacrifice will\
certainly be salutary and of great benefit; those, on the other hand, who\
find it irksome, and repine, are no true monks, and have made a mistake in\
entering the monastery\'97their proper place is in the world. Even in the\
temple one cannot be safe from sin and the devil. So it was no good taking\
it too much into account.\'94\
\
\'93He is weaker, a drowsiness has come over him,\'94 Father Pa\'efssy whispered to\
Alyosha, as he blessed him. \'93It\'92s difficult to rouse him. And he must not\
be roused. He waked up for five minutes, sent his blessing to the\
brothers, and begged their prayers for him at night. He intends to take\
the sacrament again in the morning. He remembered you, Alexey. He asked\
whether you had gone away, and was told that you were in the town. \'91I\
blessed him for that work,\'92 he said, \'91his place is there, not here, for\
awhile.\'92 Those were his words about you. He remembered you lovingly, with\
anxiety; do you understand how he honored you? But how is it that he has\
decided that you shall spend some time in the world? He must have foreseen\
something in your destiny! Understand, Alexey, that if you return to the\
world, it must be to do the duty laid upon you by your elder, and not for\
frivolous vanity and worldly pleasures.\'94\
\
Father Pa\'efssy went out. Alyosha had no doubt that Father Zossima was\
dying, though he might live another day or two. Alyosha firmly and\
ardently resolved that in spite of his promises to his father, the\
Hohlakovs, and Katerina Ivanovna, he would not leave the monastery next\
day, but would remain with his elder to the end. His heart glowed with\
love, and he reproached himself bitterly for having been able for one\
instant to forget him whom he had left in the monastery on his deathbed,\
and whom he honored above every one in the world. He went into Father\
Zossima\'92s bedroom, knelt down, and bowed to the ground before the elder,\
who slept quietly without stirring, with regular, hardly audible breathing\
and a peaceful face.\
\
Alyosha returned to the other room, where Father Zossima had received his\
guests in the morning. Taking off his boots, he lay down on the hard,\
narrow, leathern sofa, which he had long used as a bed, bringing nothing\
but a pillow. The mattress, about which his father had shouted to him that\
morning, he had long forgotten to lie on. He took off his cassock, which\
he used as a covering. But before going to bed, he fell on his knees and\
prayed a long time. In his fervent prayer he did not beseech God to\
lighten his darkness but only thirsted for the joyous emotion, which\
always visited his soul after the praise and adoration, of which his\
evening prayer usually consisted. That joy always brought him light\
untroubled sleep. As he was praying, he suddenly felt in his pocket the\
little pink note the servant had handed him as he left Katerina\
Ivanovna\'92s. He was disturbed, but finished his prayer. Then, after some\
hesitation, he opened the envelope. In it was a letter to him, signed by\
Lise, the young daughter of Madame Hohlakov, who had laughed at him before\
the elder in the morning.\
\
\'93Alexey Fyodorovitch,\'94 she wrote, \'93I am writing to you without any one\'92s\
knowledge, even mamma\'92s, and I know how wrong it is. But I cannot live\
without telling you the feeling that has sprung up in my heart, and this\
no one but us two must know for a time. But how am I to say what I want so\
much to tell you? Paper, they say, does not blush, but I assure you it\'92s\
not true and that it\'92s blushing just as I am now, all over. Dear Alyosha,\
I love you, I\'92ve loved you from my childhood, since our Moscow days, when\
you were very different from what you are now, and I shall love you all my\
life. My heart has chosen you, to unite our lives, and pass them together\
till our old age. Of course, on condition that you will leave the\
monastery. As for our age we will wait for the time fixed by the law. By\
that time I shall certainly be quite strong, I shall be walking and\
dancing. There can be no doubt of that.\
\
\'93You see how I\'92ve thought of everything. There\'92s only one thing I can\'92t\
imagine: what you\'92ll think of me when you read this. I\'92m always laughing\
and being naughty. I made you angry this morning, but I assure you before\
I took up my pen, I prayed before the Image of the Mother of God, and now\
I\'92m praying, and almost crying.\
\
\'93My secret is in your hands. When you come to\uc0\u8208 morrow, I don\'92t know how I\
shall look at you. Ah, Alexey Fyodorovitch, what if I can\'92t restrain\
myself like a silly and laugh when I look at you as I did to\uc0\u8208 day. You\'92ll\
think I\'92m a nasty girl making fun of you, and you won\'92t believe my letter.\
And so I beg you, dear one, if you\'92ve any pity for me, when you come to\uc0\u8208 \
morrow, don\'92t look me straight in the face, for if I meet your eyes, it\
will be sure to make me laugh, especially as you\'92ll be in that long gown.\
I feel cold all over when I think of it, so when you come, don\'92t look at\
me at all for a time, look at mamma or at the window....\
\
\'93Here I\'92ve written you a love\uc0\u8208 letter. Oh, dear, what have I done? Alyosha,\
don\'92t despise me, and if I\'92ve done something very horrid and wounded you,\
forgive me. Now the secret of my reputation, ruined perhaps for ever, is\
in your hands.\
\
\'93I shall certainly cry to\uc0\u8208 day. Good\u8208 by till our meeting, our _awful_\
meeting.\'97LISE.\
\
\'93P.S.\'97Alyosha! You must, must, must come!\'97LISE.\'94\
\
Alyosha read the note in amazement, read it through twice, thought a\
little, and suddenly laughed a soft, sweet laugh. He started. That laugh\
seemed to him sinful. But a minute later he laughed again just as softly\
and happily. He slowly replaced the note in the envelope, crossed himself\
and lay down. The agitation in his heart passed at once. \'93God, have mercy\
upon all of them, have all these unhappy and turbulent souls in Thy\
keeping, and set them in the right path. All ways are Thine. Save them\
according to Thy wisdom. Thou art love. Thou wilt send joy to all!\'94\
Alyosha murmured, crossing himself, and falling into peaceful sleep.\
\
\
\
\
\
PART II\
\
\
\
\
Book IV. Lacerations\
\
\
\
Chapter I. Father Ferapont\
\
\
Alyosha was roused early, before daybreak. Father Zossima woke up feeling\
very weak, though he wanted to get out of bed and sit up in a chair. His\
mind was quite clear; his face looked very tired, yet bright and almost\
joyful. It wore an expression of gayety, kindness and cordiality. \'93Maybe I\
shall not live through the coming day,\'94 he said to Alyosha. Then he\
desired to confess and take the sacrament at once. He always confessed to\
Father Pa\'efssy. After taking the communion, the service of extreme unction\
followed. The monks assembled and the cell was gradually filled up by the\
inmates of the hermitage. Meantime it was daylight. People began coming\
from the monastery. After the service was over the elder desired to kiss\
and take leave of every one. As the cell was so small the earlier visitors\
withdrew to make room for others. Alyosha stood beside the elder, who was\
seated again in his arm\uc0\u8208 chair. He talked as much as he could. Though his\
voice was weak, it was fairly steady.\
\
\'93I\'92ve been teaching you so many years, and therefore I\'92ve been talking\
aloud so many years, that I\'92ve got into the habit of talking, and so much\
so that it\'92s almost more difficult for me to hold my tongue than to talk,\
even now, in spite of my weakness, dear Fathers and brothers,\'94 he jested,\
looking with emotion at the group round him.\
\
Alyosha remembered afterwards something of what he said to them. But\
though he spoke out distinctly and his voice was fairly steady, his speech\
was somewhat disconnected. He spoke of many things, he seemed anxious\
before the moment of death to say everything he had not said in his life,\
and not simply for the sake of instructing them, but as though thirsting\
to share with all men and all creation his joy and ecstasy, and once more\
in his life to open his whole heart.\
\
\'93Love one another, Fathers,\'94 said Father Zossima, as far as Alyosha could\
remember afterwards. \'93Love God\'92s people. Because we have come here and\
shut ourselves within these walls, we are no holier than those that are\
outside, but on the contrary, from the very fact of coming here, each of\
us has confessed to himself that he is worse than others, than all men on\
earth.... And the longer the monk lives in his seclusion, the more keenly\
he must recognize that. Else he would have had no reason to come here.\
When he realizes that he is not only worse than others, but that he is\
responsible to all men for all and everything, for all human sins,\
national and individual, only then the aim of our seclusion is attained.\
For know, dear ones, that every one of us is undoubtedly responsible for\
all men and everything on earth, not merely through the general sinfulness\
of creation, but each one personally for all mankind and every individual\
man. This knowledge is the crown of life for the monk and for every man.\
For monks are not a special sort of men, but only what all men ought to\
be. Only through that knowledge, our heart grows soft with infinite,\
universal, inexhaustible love. Then every one of you will have the power\
to win over the whole world by love and to wash away the sins of the world\
with your tears.... Each of you keep watch over your heart and confess\
your sins to yourself unceasingly. Be not afraid of your sins, even when\
perceiving them, if only there be penitence, but make no conditions with\
God. Again I say, Be not proud. Be proud neither to the little nor to the\
great. Hate not those who reject you, who insult you, who abuse and\
slander you. Hate not the atheists, the teachers of evil, the\
materialists\'97and I mean not only the good ones\'97for there are many good\
ones among them, especially in our day\'97hate not even the wicked ones.\
Remember them in your prayers thus: Save, O Lord, all those who have none\
to pray for them, save too all those who will not pray. And add: it is not\
in pride that I make this prayer, O Lord, for I am lower than all men....\
Love God\'92s people, let not strangers draw away the flock, for if you\
slumber in your slothfulness and disdainful pride, or worse still, in\
covetousness, they will come from all sides and draw away your flock.\
Expound the Gospel to the people unceasingly ... be not extortionate....\
Do not love gold and silver, do not hoard them.... Have faith. Cling to\
the banner and raise it on high.\'94\
\
But the elder spoke more disconnectedly than Alyosha reported his words\
afterwards. Sometimes he broke off altogether, as though to take breath,\
and recover his strength, but he was in a sort of ecstasy. They heard him\
with emotion, though many wondered at his words and found them obscure....\
Afterwards all remembered those words.\
\
When Alyosha happened for a moment to leave the cell, he was struck by the\
general excitement and suspense in the monks who were crowding about it.\
This anticipation showed itself in some by anxiety, in others by devout\
solemnity. All were expecting that some marvel would happen immediately\
after the elder\'92s death. Their suspense was, from one point of view,\
almost frivolous, but even the most austere of the monks were affected by\
it. Father Pa\'efssy\'92s face looked the gravest of all.\
\
Alyosha was mysteriously summoned by a monk to see Rakitin, who had\
arrived from town with a singular letter for him from Madame Hohlakov. In\
it she informed Alyosha of a strange and very opportune incident. It\
appeared that among the women who had come on the previous day to receive\
Father Zossima\'92s blessing, there had been an old woman from the town, a\
sergeant\'92s widow, called Prohorovna. She had inquired whether she might\
pray for the rest of the soul of her son, Vassenka, who had gone to\
Irkutsk, and had sent her no news for over a year. To which Father Zossima\
had answered sternly, forbidding her to do so, and saying that to pray for\
the living as though they were dead was a kind of sorcery. He afterwards\
forgave her on account of her ignorance, and added, \'93as though reading the\
book of the future\'94 (this was Madame Hohlakov\'92s expression), words of\
comfort: \'93that her son Vassya was certainly alive and he would either come\
himself very shortly or send a letter, and that she was to go home and\
expect him.\'94 And \'93Would you believe it?\'94 exclaimed Madame Hohlakov\
enthusiastically, \'93the prophecy has been fulfilled literally indeed, and\
more than that.\'94 Scarcely had the old woman reached home when they gave\
her a letter from Siberia which had been awaiting her. But that was not\
all; in the letter written on the road from Ekaterinenburg, Vassya\
informed his mother that he was returning to Russia with an official, and\
that three weeks after her receiving the letter he hoped \'93to embrace his\
mother.\'94\
\
Madame Hohlakov warmly entreated Alyosha to report this new \'93miracle of\
prediction\'94 to the Superior and all the brotherhood. \'93All, all, ought to\
know of it!\'94 she concluded. The letter had been written in haste, the\
excitement of the writer was apparent in every line of it. But Alyosha had\
no need to tell the monks, for all knew of it already. Rakitin had\
commissioned the monk who brought his message \'93to inform most respectfully\
his reverence Father Pa\'efssy, that he, Rakitin, has a matter to speak of\
with him, of such gravity that he dare not defer it for a moment, and\
humbly begs forgiveness for his presumption.\'94 As the monk had given the\
message to Father Pa\'efssy before that to Alyosha, the latter found after\
reading the letter, there was nothing left for him to do but to hand it to\
Father Pa\'efssy in confirmation of the story.\
\
And even that austere and cautious man, though he frowned as he read the\
news of the \'93miracle,\'94 could not completely restrain some inner emotion.\
His eyes gleamed, and a grave and solemn smile came into his lips.\
\
\'93We shall see greater things!\'94 broke from him.\
\
\'93We shall see greater things, greater things yet!\'94 the monks around\
repeated.\
\
But Father Pa\'efssy, frowning again, begged all of them, at least for a\
time, not to speak of the matter \'93till it be more fully confirmed, seeing\
there is so much credulity among those of this world, and indeed this\
might well have chanced naturally,\'94 he added, prudently, as it were to\
satisfy his conscience, though scarcely believing his own disavowal, a\
fact his listeners very clearly perceived.\
\
Within the hour the \'93miracle\'94 was of course known to the whole monastery,\
and many visitors who had come for the mass. No one seemed more impressed\
by it than the monk who had come the day before from St. Sylvester, from\
the little monastery of Obdorsk in the far North. It was he who had been\
standing near Madame Hohlakov the previous day and had asked Father\
Zossima earnestly, referring to the \'93healing\'94 of the lady\'92s daughter, \'93How\
can you presume to do such things?\'94\
\
He was now somewhat puzzled and did not know whom to believe. The evening\
before he had visited Father Ferapont in his cell apart, behind the\
apiary, and had been greatly impressed and overawed by the visit. This\
Father Ferapont was that aged monk so devout in fasting and observing\
silence who has been mentioned already, as antagonistic to Father Zossima\
and the whole institution of \'93elders,\'94 which he regarded as a pernicious\
and frivolous innovation. He was a very formidable opponent, although from\
his practice of silence he scarcely spoke a word to any one. What made him\
formidable was that a number of monks fully shared his feeling, and many\
of the visitors looked upon him as a great saint and ascetic, although\
they had no doubt that he was crazy. But it was just his craziness\
attracted them.\
\
Father Ferapont never went to see the elder. Though he lived in the\
hermitage they did not worry him to keep its regulations, and this too\
because he behaved as though he were crazy. He was seventy\uc0\u8208 five or more,\
and he lived in a corner beyond the apiary in an old decaying wooden cell\
which had been built long ago for another great ascetic, Father Iona, who\
had lived to be a hundred and five, and of whose saintly doings many\
curious stories were still extant in the monastery and the neighborhood.\
\
Father Ferapont had succeeded in getting himself installed in this same\
solitary cell seven years previously. It was simply a peasant\'92s hut,\
though it looked like a chapel, for it contained an extraordinary number\
of ikons with lamps perpetually burning before them\'97which men brought to\
the monastery as offerings to God. Father Ferapont had been appointed to\
look after them and keep the lamps burning. It was said (and indeed it was\
true) that he ate only two pounds of bread in three days. The beekeeper,\
who lived close by the apiary, used to bring him the bread every three\
days, and even to this man who waited upon him, Father Ferapont rarely\
uttered a word. The four pounds of bread, together with the sacrament\
bread, regularly sent him on Sundays after the late mass by the Father\
Superior, made up his weekly rations. The water in his jug was changed\
every day. He rarely appeared at mass. Visitors who came to do him homage\
saw him sometimes kneeling all day long at prayer without looking round.\
If he addressed them, he was brief, abrupt, strange, and almost always\
rude. On very rare occasions, however, he would talk to visitors, but for\
the most part he would utter some one strange saying which was a complete\
riddle, and no entreaties would induce him to pronounce a word in\
explanation. He was not a priest, but a simple monk. There was a strange\
belief, chiefly however among the most ignorant, that Father Ferapont had\
communication with heavenly spirits and would only converse with them, and\
so was silent with men.\
\
The monk from Obdorsk, having been directed to the apiary by the\
beekeeper, who was also a very silent and surly monk, went to the corner\
where Father Ferapont\'92s cell stood. \'93Maybe he will speak as you are a\
stranger and maybe you\'92ll get nothing out of him,\'94 the beekeeper had\
warned him. The monk, as he related afterwards, approached in the utmost\
apprehension. It was rather late in the evening. Father Ferapont was\
sitting at the door of his cell on a low bench. A huge old elm was lightly\
rustling overhead. There was an evening freshness in the air. The monk\
from Obdorsk bowed down before the saint and asked his blessing.\
\
\'93Do you want me to bow down to you, monk?\'94 said Father Ferapont. \'93Get up!\'94\
\
The monk got up.\
\
\'93Blessing, be blessed! Sit beside me. Where have you come from?\'94\
\
What most struck the poor monk was the fact that in spite of his strict\
fasting and great age, Father Ferapont still looked a vigorous old man. He\
was tall, held himself erect, and had a thin, but fresh and healthy face.\
There was no doubt he still had considerable strength. He was of athletic\
build. In spite of his great age he was not even quite gray, and still had\
very thick hair and a full beard, both of which had once been black. His\
eyes were gray, large and luminous, but strikingly prominent. He spoke\
with a broad accent. He was dressed in a peasant\'92s long reddish coat of\
coarse convict cloth (as it used to be called) and had a stout rope round\
his waist. His throat and chest were bare. Beneath his coat, his shirt of\
the coarsest linen showed almost black with dirt, not having been changed\
for months. They said that he wore irons weighing thirty pounds under his\
coat. His stockingless feet were thrust in old slippers almost dropping to\
pieces.\
\
\'93From the little Obdorsk monastery, from St. Sylvester,\'94 the monk answered\
humbly, whilst his keen and inquisitive, but rather frightened little eyes\
kept watch on the hermit.\
\
\'93I have been at your Sylvester\'92s. I used to stay there. Is Sylvester\
well?\'94\
\
The monk hesitated.\
\
\'93You are a senseless lot! How do you keep the fasts?\'94\
\
\'93Our dietary is according to the ancient conventual rules. During Lent\
there are no meals provided for Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. For Tuesday\
and Thursday we have white bread, stewed fruit with honey, wild berries,\
or salt cabbage and wholemeal stirabout. On Saturday white cabbage soup,\
noodles with peas, kasha, all with hemp oil. On weekdays we have dried\
fish and kasha with the cabbage soup. From Monday till Saturday evening,\
six whole days in Holy Week, nothing is cooked, and we have only bread and\
water, and that sparingly; if possible not taking food every day, just the\
same as is ordered for first week in Lent. On Good Friday nothing is\
eaten. In the same way on the Saturday we have to fast till three o\'92clock,\
and then take a little bread and water and drink a single cup of wine. On\
Holy Thursday we drink wine and have something cooked without oil or not\
cooked at all, inasmuch as the Laodicean council lays down for Holy\
Thursday: \'91It is unseemly by remitting the fast on the Holy Thursday to\
dishonor the whole of Lent!\'92 This is how we keep the fast. But what is\
that compared with you, holy Father,\'94 added the monk, growing more\
confident, \'93for all the year round, even at Easter, you take nothing but\
bread and water, and what we should eat in two days lasts you full seven.\
It\'92s truly marvelous\'97your great abstinence.\'94\
\
\'93And mushrooms?\'94 asked Father Ferapont, suddenly.\
\
\'93Mushrooms?\'94 repeated the surprised monk.\
\
\'93Yes. I can give up their bread, not needing it at all, and go away into\
the forest and live there on the mushrooms or the berries, but they can\'92t\
give up their bread here, wherefore they are in bondage to the devil.\
Nowadays the unclean deny that there is need of such fasting. Haughty and\
unclean is their judgment.\'94\
\
\'93Och, true,\'94 sighed the monk.\
\
\'93And have you seen devils among them?\'94 asked Ferapont.\
\
\'93Among them? Among whom?\'94 asked the monk, timidly.\
\
\'93I went to the Father Superior on Trinity Sunday last year, I haven\'92t been\
since. I saw a devil sitting on one man\'92s chest hiding under his cassock,\
only his horns poked out; another had one peeping out of his pocket with\
such sharp eyes, he was afraid of me; another settled in the unclean belly\
of one, another was hanging round a man\'92s neck, and so he was carrying him\
about without seeing him.\'94\
\
\'93You\'97can see spirits?\'94 the monk inquired.\
\
\'93I tell you I can see, I can see through them. When I was coming out from\
the Superior\'92s I saw one hiding from me behind the door, and a big one, a\
yard and a half or more high, with a thick long gray tail, and the tip of\
his tail was in the crack of the door and I was quick and slammed the\
door, pinching his tail in it. He squealed and began to struggle, and I\
made the sign of the cross over him three times. And he died on the spot\
like a crushed spider. He must have rotted there in the corner and be\
stinking, but they don\'92t see, they don\'92t smell it. It\'92s a year since I\
have been there. I reveal it to you, as you are a stranger.\'94\
\
\'93Your words are terrible! But, holy and blessed Father,\'94 said the monk,\
growing bolder and bolder, \'93is it true, as they noise abroad even to\
distant lands about you, that you are in continual communication with the\
Holy Ghost?\'94\
\
\'93He does fly down at times.\'94\
\
\'93How does he fly down? In what form?\'94\
\
\'93As a bird.\'94\
\
\'93The Holy Ghost in the form of a dove?\'94\
\
\'93There\'92s the Holy Ghost and there\'92s the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit can\
appear as other birds\'97sometimes as a swallow, sometimes a goldfinch and\
sometimes as a blue\uc0\u8208 tit.\'94\
\
\'93How do you know him from an ordinary tit?\'94\
\
\'93He speaks.\'94\
\
\'93How does he speak, in what language?\'94\
\
\'93Human language.\'94\
\
\'93And what does he tell you?\'94\
\
\'93Why, to\uc0\u8208 day he told me that a fool would visit me and would ask me\
unseemly questions. You want to know too much, monk.\'94\
\
\'93Terrible are your words, most holy and blessed Father,\'94 the monk shook\
his head. But there was a doubtful look in his frightened little eyes.\
\
\'93Do you see this tree?\'94 asked Father Ferapont, after a pause.\
\
\'93I do, blessed Father.\'94\
\
\'93You think it\'92s an elm, but for me it has another shape.\'94\
\
\'93What sort of shape?\'94 inquired the monk, after a pause of vain\
expectation.\
\
\'93It happens at night. You see those two branches? In the night it is\
Christ holding out His arms to me and seeking me with those arms, I see it\
clearly and tremble. It\'92s terrible, terrible!\'94\
\
\'93What is there terrible if it\'92s Christ Himself?\'94\
\
\'93Why, He\'92ll snatch me up and carry me away.\'94\
\
\'93Alive?\'94\
\
\'93In the spirit and glory of Elijah, haven\'92t you heard? He will take me in\
His arms and bear me away.\'94\
\
Though the monk returned to the cell he was sharing with one of the\
brothers, in considerable perplexity of mind, he still cherished at heart\
a greater reverence for Father Ferapont than for Father Zossima. He was\
strongly in favor of fasting, and it was not strange that one who kept so\
rigid a fast as Father Ferapont should \'93see marvels.\'94 His words seemed\
certainly queer, but God only could tell what was hidden in those words,\
and were not worse words and acts commonly seen in those who have\
sacrificed their intellects for the glory of God? The pinching of the\
devil\'92s tail he was ready and eager to believe, and not only in the\
figurative sense. Besides he had, before visiting the monastery, a strong\
prejudice against the institution of \'93elders,\'94 which he only knew of by\
hearsay and believed to be a pernicious innovation. Before he had been\
long at the monastery, he had detected the secret murmurings of some\
shallow brothers who disliked the institution. He was, besides, a\
meddlesome, inquisitive man, who poked his nose into everything. This was\
why the news of the fresh \'93miracle\'94 performed by Father Zossima reduced\
him to extreme perplexity. Alyosha remembered afterwards how their\
inquisitive guest from Obdorsk had been continually flitting to and fro\
from one group to another, listening and asking questions among the monks\
that were crowding within and without the elder\'92s cell. But he did not pay\
much attention to him at the time, and only recollected it afterwards.\
\
He had no thought to spare for it indeed, for when Father Zossima, feeling\
tired again, had gone back to bed, he thought of Alyosha as he was closing\
his eyes, and sent for him. Alyosha ran at once. There was no one else in\
the cell but Father Pa\'efssy, Father Iosif, and the novice Porfiry. The\
elder, opening his weary eyes and looking intently at Alyosha, asked him\
suddenly:\
\
\'93Are your people expecting you, my son?\'94\
\
Alyosha hesitated.\
\
\'93Haven\'92t they need of you? Didn\'92t you promise some one yesterday to see\
them to\uc0\u8208 day?\'94\
\
\'93I did promise\'97to my father\'97my brothers\'97others too.\'94\
\
\'93You see, you must go. Don\'92t grieve. Be sure I shall not die without your\
being by to hear my last word. To you I will say that word, my son, it\
will be my last gift to you. To you, dear son, because you love me. But\
now go to keep your promise.\'94\
\
Alyosha immediately obeyed, though it was hard to go. But the promise that\
he should hear his last word on earth, that it should be the last gift to\
him, Alyosha, sent a thrill of rapture through his soul. He made haste\
that he might finish what he had to do in the town and return quickly.\
Father Pa\'efssy, too, uttered some words of exhortation which moved and\
surprised him greatly. He spoke as they left the cell together.\
\
\'93Remember, young man, unceasingly,\'94 Father Pa\'efssy began, without preface,\
\'93that the science of this world, which has become a great power, has,\
especially in the last century, analyzed everything divine handed down to\
us in the holy books. After this cruel analysis the learned of this world\
have nothing left of all that was sacred of old. But they have only\
analyzed the parts and overlooked the whole, and indeed their blindness is\
marvelous. Yet the whole still stands steadfast before their eyes, and the\
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Has it not lasted nineteen\
centuries, is it not still a living, a moving power in the individual soul\
and in the masses of people? It is still as strong and living even in the\
souls of atheists, who have destroyed everything! For even those who have\
renounced Christianity and attack it, in their inmost being still follow\
the Christian ideal, for hitherto neither their subtlety nor the ardor of\
their hearts has been able to create a higher ideal of man and of virtue\
than the ideal given by Christ of old. When it has been attempted, the\
result has been only grotesque. Remember this especially, young man, since\
you are being sent into the world by your departing elder. Maybe,\
remembering this great day, you will not forget my words, uttered from the\
heart for your guidance, seeing you are young, and the temptations of the\
world are great and beyond your strength to endure. Well, now go, my\
orphan.\'94\
\
With these words Father Pa\'efssy blessed him. As Alyosha left the monastery\
and thought them over, he suddenly realized that he had met a new and\
unexpected friend, a warmly loving teacher, in this austere monk who had\
hitherto treated him sternly. It was as though Father Zossima had\
bequeathed him to him at his death, and \'93perhaps that\'92s just what had\
passed between them,\'94 Alyosha thought suddenly. The philosophic\
reflections he had just heard so unexpectedly testified to the warmth of\
Father Pa\'efssy\'92s heart. He was in haste to arm the boy\'92s mind for conflict\
with temptation and to guard the young soul left in his charge with the\
strongest defense he could imagine.\
\
\
\
Chapter II. At His Father\'92s\
\
\
First of all, Alyosha went to his father. On the way he remembered that\
his father had insisted the day before that he should come without his\
brother Ivan seeing him. \'93Why so?\'94 Alyosha wondered suddenly. \'93Even if my\
father has something to say to me alone, why should I go in unseen? Most\
likely in his excitement yesterday he meant to say something different,\'94\
he decided. Yet he was very glad when Marfa Ignatyevna, who opened the\
garden gate to him (Grigory, it appeared, was ill in bed in the lodge),\
told him in answer to his question that Ivan Fyodorovitch had gone out two\
hours ago.\
\
\'93And my father?\'94\
\
\'93He is up, taking his coffee,\'94 Marfa answered somewhat dryly.\
\
Alyosha went in. The old man was sitting alone at the table wearing\
slippers and a little old overcoat. He was amusing himself by looking\
through some accounts, rather inattentively however. He was quite alone in\
the house, for Smerdyakov too had gone out marketing. Though he had got up\
early and was trying to put a bold face on it, he looked tired and weak.\
His forehead, upon which huge purple bruises had come out during the\
night, was bandaged with a red handkerchief; his nose too had swollen\
terribly in the night, and some smaller bruises covered it in patches,\
giving his whole face a peculiarly spiteful and irritable look. The old\
man was aware of this, and turned a hostile glance on Alyosha as he came\
in.\
\
\'93The coffee is cold,\'94 he cried harshly; \'93I won\'92t offer you any. I\'92ve\
ordered nothing but a Lenten fish soup to\uc0\u8208 day, and I don\'92t invite any one\
to share it. Why have you come?\'94\
\
\'93To find out how you are,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93Yes. Besides, I told you to come yesterday. It\'92s all of no consequence.\
You need not have troubled. But I knew you\'92d come poking in directly.\'94\
\
He said this with almost hostile feeling. At the same time he got up and\
looked anxiously in the looking\uc0\u8208 glass (perhaps for the fortieth time that\
morning) at his nose. He began, too, binding his red handkerchief more\
becomingly on his forehead.\
\
\'93Red\'92s better. It\'92s just like the hospital in a white one,\'94 he observed\
sententiously. \'93Well, how are things over there? How is your elder?\'94\
\
\'93He is very bad; he may die to\uc0\u8208 day,\'94 answered Alyosha. But his father had\
not listened, and had forgotten his own question at once.\
\
\'93Ivan\'92s gone out,\'94 he said suddenly. \'93He is doing his utmost to carry off\
Mitya\'92s betrothed. That\'92s what he is staying here for,\'94 he added\
maliciously, and, twisting his mouth, looked at Alyosha.\
\
\'93Surely he did not tell you so?\'94 asked Alyosha.\
\
\'93Yes, he did, long ago. Would you believe it, he told me three weeks ago?\
You don\'92t suppose he too came to murder me, do you? He must have had some\
object in coming.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean? Why do you say such things?\'94 said Alyosha, troubled.\
\
\'93He doesn\'92t ask for money, it\'92s true, but yet he won\'92t get a farthing from\
me. I intend living as long as possible, you may as well know, my dear\
Alexey Fyodorovitch, and so I need every farthing, and the longer I live,\
the more I shall need it,\'94 he continued, pacing from one corner of the\
room to the other, keeping his hands in the pockets of his loose greasy\
overcoat made of yellow cotton material. \'93I can still pass for a man at\
five and fifty, but I want to pass for one for another twenty years. As I\
get older, you know, I shan\'92t be a pretty object. The wenches won\'92t come\
to me of their own accord, so I shall want my money. So I am saving up\
more and more, simply for myself, my dear son Alexey Fyodorovitch. You may\
as well know. For I mean to go on in my sins to the end, let me tell you.\
For sin is sweet; all abuse it, but all men live in it, only others do it\
on the sly, and I openly. And so all the other sinners fall upon me for\
being so simple. And your paradise, Alexey Fyodorovitch, is not to my\
taste, let me tell you that; and it\'92s not the proper place for a\
gentleman, your paradise, even if it exists. I believe that I fall asleep\
and don\'92t wake up again, and that\'92s all. You can pray for my soul if you\
like. And if you don\'92t want to, don\'92t, damn you! That\'92s my philosophy.\
Ivan talked well here yesterday, though we were all drunk. Ivan is a\
conceited coxcomb, but he has no particular learning ... nor education\
either. He sits silent and smiles at one without speaking\'97that\'92s what\
pulls him through.\'94\
\
Alyosha listened to him in silence.\
\
\'93Why won\'92t he talk to me? If he does speak, he gives himself airs. Your\
Ivan is a scoundrel! And I\'92ll marry Grushenka in a minute if I want to.\
For if you\'92ve money, Alexey Fyodorovitch, you have only to want a thing\
and you can have it. That\'92s what Ivan is afraid of, he is on the watch to\
prevent me getting married and that\'92s why he is egging on Mitya to marry\
Grushenka himself. He hopes to keep me from Grushenka by that (as though I\
should leave him my money if I don\'92t marry her!). Besides if Mitya marries\
Grushenka, Ivan will carry off his rich betrothed, that\'92s what he\'92s\
reckoning on! He is a scoundrel, your Ivan!\'94\
\
\'93How cross you are! It\'92s because of yesterday; you had better lie down,\'94\
said Alyosha.\
\
\'93There! you say that,\'94 the old man observed suddenly, as though it had\
struck him for the first time, \'93and I am not angry with you. But if Ivan\
said it, I should be angry with him. It is only with you I have good\
moments, else you know I am an ill\uc0\u8208 natured man.\'94\
\
\'93You are not ill\uc0\u8208 natured, but distorted,\'94 said Alyosha with a smile.\
\
\'93Listen. I meant this morning to get that ruffian Mitya locked up and I\
don\'92t know now what I shall decide about it. Of course in these\
fashionable days fathers and mothers are looked upon as a prejudice, but\
even now the law does not allow you to drag your old father about by the\
hair, to kick him in the face in his own house, and brag of murdering him\
outright\'97all in the presence of witnesses. If I liked, I could crush him\
and could have him locked up at once for what he did yesterday.\'94\
\
\'93Then you don\'92t mean to take proceedings?\'94\
\
\'93Ivan has dissuaded me. I shouldn\'92t care about Ivan, but there\'92s another\
thing.\'94\
\
And bending down to Alyosha, he went on in a confidential half\uc0\u8208 whisper.\
\
\'93If I send the ruffian to prison, she\'92ll hear of it and run to see him at\
once. But if she hears that he has beaten me, a weak old man, within an\
inch of my life, she may give him up and come to me.... For that\'92s her\
way, everything by contraries. I know her through and through! Won\'92t you\
have a drop of brandy? Take some cold coffee and I\'92ll pour a quarter of a\
glass of brandy into it, it\'92s delicious, my boy.\'94\
\
\'93No, thank you. I\'92ll take that roll with me if I may,\'94 said Alyosha, and\
taking a halfpenny French roll he put it in the pocket of his cassock.\
\'93And you\'92d better not have brandy, either,\'94 he suggested apprehensively,\
looking into the old man\'92s face.\
\
\'93You are quite right, it irritates my nerves instead of soothing them.\
Only one little glass. I\'92ll get it out of the cupboard.\'94\
\
He unlocked the cupboard, poured out a glass, drank it, then locked the\
cupboard and put the key back in his pocket.\
\
\'93That\'92s enough. One glass won\'92t kill me.\'94\
\
\'93You see you are in a better humor now,\'94 said Alyosha, smiling.\
\
\'93Um! I love you even without the brandy, but with scoundrels I am a\
scoundrel. Ivan is not going to Tchermashnya\'97why is that? He wants to spy\
how much I give Grushenka if she comes. They are all scoundrels! But I\
don\'92t recognize Ivan, I don\'92t know him at all. Where does he come from? He\
is not one of us in soul. As though I\'92d leave him anything! I shan\'92t leave\
a will at all, you may as well know. And I\'92ll crush Mitya like a beetle. I\
squash black\uc0\u8208 beetles at night with my slipper; they squelch when you tread\
on them. And your Mitya will squelch too. _Your_ Mitya, for you love him.\
Yes, you love him and I am not afraid of your loving him. But if Ivan\
loved him I should be afraid for myself at his loving him. But Ivan loves\
nobody. Ivan is not one of us. People like Ivan are not our sort, my boy.\
They are like a cloud of dust. When the wind blows, the dust will be\
gone.... I had a silly idea in my head when I told you to come to\uc0\u8208 day; I\
wanted to find out from you about Mitya. If I were to hand him over a\
thousand or maybe two now, would the beggarly wretch agree to take himself\
off altogether for five years or, better still, thirty\uc0\u8208 five, and without\
Grushenka, and give her up once for all, eh?\'94\
\
\'93I\'97I\'92ll ask him,\'94 muttered Alyosha. \'93If you would give him three thousand,\
perhaps he\'97\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s nonsense! You needn\'92t ask him now, no need! I\'92ve changed my mind.\
It was a nonsensical idea of mine. I won\'92t give him anything, not a penny,\
I want my money myself,\'94 cried the old man, waving his hand. \'93I\'92ll crush\
him like a beetle without it. Don\'92t say anything to him or else he will\
begin hoping. There\'92s nothing for you to do here, you needn\'92t stay. Is\
that betrothed of his, Katerina Ivanovna, whom he has kept so carefully\
hidden from me all this time, going to marry him or not? You went to see\
her yesterday, I believe?\'94\
\
\'93Nothing will induce her to abandon him.\'94\
\
\'93There you see how dearly these fine young ladies love a rake and a\
scoundrel. They are poor creatures I tell you, those pale young ladies,\
very different from\'97Ah, if I had his youth and the looks I had then (for I\
was better\uc0\u8208 looking than he at eight and twenty) I\'92d have been a conquering\
hero just as he is. He is a low cad! But he shan\'92t have Grushenka, anyway,\
he shan\'92t! I\'92ll crush him!\'94\
\
His anger had returned with the last words.\
\
\'93You can go. There\'92s nothing for you to do here to\uc0\u8208 day,\'94 he snapped\
harshly.\
\
Alyosha went up to say good\uc0\u8208 by to him, and kissed him on the shoulder.\
\
\'93What\'92s that for?\'94 The old man was a little surprised. \'93We shall see each\
other again, or do you think we shan\'92t?\'94\
\
\'93Not at all, I didn\'92t mean anything.\'94\
\
\'93Nor did I, I did not mean anything,\'94 said the old man, looking at him.\
\'93Listen, listen,\'94 he shouted after him, \'93make haste and come again and\
I\'92ll have a fish soup for you, a fine one, not like to\uc0\u8208 day. Be sure to\
come! Come to\uc0\u8208 morrow, do you hear, to\u8208 morrow!\'94\
\
And as soon as Alyosha had gone out of the door, he went to the cupboard\
again and poured out another half\uc0\u8208 glass.\
\
\'93I won\'92t have more!\'94 he muttered, clearing his throat, and again he locked\
the cupboard and put the key in his pocket. Then he went into his bedroom,\
lay down on the bed, exhausted, and in one minute he was asleep.\
\
\
\
Chapter III. A Meeting With The Schoolboys\
\
\
\'93Thank goodness he did not ask me about Grushenka,\'94 thought Alyosha, as he\
left his father\'92s house and turned towards Madame Hohlakov\'92s, \'93or I might\
have to tell him of my meeting with Grushenka yesterday.\'94\
\
Alyosha felt painfully that since yesterday both combatants had renewed\
their energies, and that their hearts had grown hard again. \'93Father is\
spiteful and angry, he\'92s made some plan and will stick to it. And what of\
Dmitri? He too will be harder than yesterday, he too must be spiteful and\
angry, and he too, no doubt, has made some plan. Oh, I must succeed in\
finding him to\uc0\u8208 day, whatever happens.\'94\
\
But Alyosha had not long to meditate. An incident occurred on the road,\
which, though apparently of little consequence, made a great impression on\
him. Just after he had crossed the square and turned the corner coming out\
into Mihailovsky Street, which is divided by a small ditch from the High\
Street (our whole town is intersected by ditches), he saw a group of\
schoolboys between the ages of nine and twelve, at the bridge. They were\
going home from school, some with their bags on their shoulders, others\
with leather satchels slung across them, some in short jackets, others in\
little overcoats. Some even had those high boots with creases round the\
ankles, such as little boys spoilt by rich fathers love to wear. The whole\
group was talking eagerly about something, apparently holding a council.\
Alyosha had never from his Moscow days been able to pass children without\
taking notice of them, and although he was particularly fond of children\
of three or thereabout, he liked schoolboys of ten and eleven too. And so,\
anxious as he was to\uc0\u8208 day, he wanted at once to turn aside to talk to them.\
He looked into their excited rosy faces, and noticed at once that all the\
boys had stones in their hands. Behind the ditch some thirty paces away,\
there was another schoolboy standing by a fence. He too had a satchel at\
his side. He was about ten years old, pale, delicate\uc0\u8208 looking and with\
sparkling black eyes. He kept an attentive and anxious watch on the other\
six, obviously his schoolfellows with whom he had just come out of school,\
but with whom he had evidently had a feud.\
\
Alyosha went up and, addressing a fair, curly\uc0\u8208 headed, rosy boy in a black\
jacket, observed:\
\
\'93When I used to wear a satchel like yours, I always used to carry it on my\
left side, so as to have my right hand free, but you\'92ve got yours on your\
right side. So it will be awkward for you to get at it.\'94\
\
Alyosha had no art or premeditation in beginning with this practical\
remark. But it is the only way for a grown\uc0\u8208 up person to get at once into\
confidential relations with a child, or still more with a group of\
children. One must begin in a serious, businesslike way so as to be on a\
perfectly equal footing. Alyosha understood it by instinct.\
\
\'93But he is left\uc0\u8208 handed,\'94 another, a fine healthy\u8208 looking boy of eleven,\
answered promptly. All the others stared at Alyosha.\
\
\'93He even throws stones with his left hand,\'94 observed a third.\
\
At that instant a stone flew into the group, but only just grazed the\
left\uc0\u8208 handed boy, though it was well and vigorously thrown by the boy\
standing the other side of the ditch.\
\
\'93Give it him, hit him back, Smurov,\'94 they all shouted. But Smurov, the\
left\uc0\u8208 handed boy, needed no telling, and at once revenged himself; he threw\
a stone, but it missed the boy and hit the ground. The boy the other side\
of the ditch, the pocket of whose coat was visibly bulging with stones,\
flung another stone at the group; this time it flew straight at Alyosha\
and hit him painfully on the shoulder.\
\
\'93He aimed it at you, he meant it for you. You are Karamazov, Karamazov!\'94\
the boys shouted, laughing. \'93Come, all throw at him at once!\'94 and six\
stones flew at the boy. One struck the boy on the head and he fell down,\
but at once leapt up and began ferociously returning their fire. Both\
sides threw stones incessantly. Many of the group had their pockets full\
too.\
\
\'93What are you about! Aren\'92t you ashamed? Six against one! Why, you\'92ll kill\
him,\'94 cried Alyosha.\
\
He ran forward and met the flying stones to screen the solitary boy. Three\
or four ceased throwing for a minute.\
\
\'93He began first!\'94 cried a boy in a red shirt in an angry childish voice.\
\'93He is a beast, he stabbed Krassotkin in class the other day with a\
penknife. It bled. Krassotkin wouldn\'92t tell tales, but he must be\
thrashed.\'94\
\
\'93But what for? I suppose you tease him.\'94\
\
\'93There, he sent a stone in your back again, he knows you,\'94 cried the\
children. \'93It\'92s you he is throwing at now, not us. Come, all of you, at\
him again, don\'92t miss, Smurov!\'94 and again a fire of stones, and a very\
vicious one, began. The boy the other side of the ditch was hit in the\
chest; he screamed, began to cry and ran away uphill towards Mihailovsky\
Street. They all shouted: \'93Aha, he is funking, he is running away. Wisp of\
tow!\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t know what a beast he is, Karamazov, killing is too good for\
him,\'94 said the boy in the jacket, with flashing eyes. He seemed to be the\
eldest.\
\
\'93What\'92s wrong with him?\'94 asked Alyosha, \'93is he a tell\uc0\u8208 tale or what?\'94\
\
The boys looked at one another as though derisively.\
\
\'93Are you going that way, to Mihailovsky?\'94 the same boy went on. \'93Catch him\
up.... You see he\'92s stopped again, he is waiting and looking at you.\'94\
\
\'93He is looking at you,\'94 the other boys chimed in.\
\
\'93You ask him, does he like a disheveled wisp of tow. Do you hear, ask him\
that!\'94\
\
There was a general burst of laughter. Alyosha looked at them, and they at\
him.\
\
\'93Don\'92t go near him, he\'92ll hurt you,\'94 cried Smurov in a warning voice.\
\
\'93I shan\'92t ask him about the wisp of tow, for I expect you tease him with\
that question somehow. But I\'92ll find out from him why you hate him so.\'94\
\
\'93Find out then, find out,\'94 cried the boys, laughing.\
\
Alyosha crossed the bridge and walked uphill by the fence, straight\
towards the boy.\
\
\'93You\'92d better look out,\'94 the boys called after him; \'93he won\'92t be afraid of\
you. He will stab you in a minute, on the sly, as he did Krassotkin.\'94\
\
The boy waited for him without budging. Coming up to him, Alyosha saw\
facing him a child of about nine years old. He was an undersized weakly\
boy with a thin pale face, with large dark eyes that gazed at him\
vindictively. He was dressed in a rather shabby old overcoat, which he had\
monstrously outgrown. His bare arms stuck out beyond his sleeves. There\
was a large patch on the right knee of his trousers, and in his right boot\
just at the toe there was a big hole in the leather, carefully blackened\
with ink. Both the pockets of his great\uc0\u8208 coat were weighed down with\
stones. Alyosha stopped two steps in front of him, looking inquiringly at\
him. The boy, seeing at once from Alyosha\'92s eyes that he wouldn\'92t beat\
him, became less defiant, and addressed him first.\
\
\'93I am alone, and there are six of them. I\'92ll beat them all, alone!\'94 he\
said suddenly, with flashing eyes.\
\
\'93I think one of the stones must have hurt you badly,\'94 observed Alyosha.\
\
\'93But I hit Smurov on the head!\'94 cried the boy.\
\
\'93They told me that you know me, and that you threw a stone at me on\
purpose,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
The boy looked darkly at him.\
\
\'93I don\'92t know you. Do you know me?\'94 Alyosha continued.\
\
\'93Let me alone!\'94 the boy cried irritably; but he did not move, as though he\
were expecting something, and again there was a vindictive light in his\
eyes.\
\
\'93Very well, I am going,\'94 said Alyosha; \'93only I don\'92t know you and I don\'92t\
tease you. They told me how they tease you, but I don\'92t want to tease you.\
Good\uc0\u8208 by!\'94\
\
\'93Monk in silk trousers!\'94 cried the boy, following Alyosha with the same\
vindictive and defiant expression, and he threw himself into an attitude\
of defense, feeling sure that now Alyosha would fall upon him; but Alyosha\
turned, looked at him, and walked away. He had not gone three steps before\
the biggest stone the boy had in his pocket hit him a painful blow in the\
back.\
\
\'93So you\'92ll hit a man from behind! They tell the truth, then, when they say\
that you attack on the sly,\'94 said Alyosha, turning round again. This time\
the boy threw a stone savagely right into Alyosha\'92s face; but Alyosha just\
had time to guard himself, and the stone struck him on the elbow.\
\
\'93Aren\'92t you ashamed? What have I done to you?\'94 he cried.\
\
The boy waited in silent defiance, certain that now Alyosha would attack\
him. Seeing that even now he would not, his rage was like a little wild\
beast\'92s; he flew at Alyosha himself, and before Alyosha had time to move,\
the spiteful child had seized his left hand with both of his and bit his\
middle finger. He fixed his teeth in it and it was ten seconds before he\
let go. Alyosha cried out with pain and pulled his finger away with all\
his might. The child let go at last and retreated to his former distance.\
Alyosha\'92s finger had been badly bitten to the bone, close to the nail; it\
began to bleed. Alyosha took out his handkerchief and bound it tightly\
round his injured hand. He was a full minute bandaging it. The boy stood\
waiting all the time. At last Alyosha raised his gentle eyes and looked at\
him.\
\
\'93Very well,\'94 he said, \'93you see how badly you\'92ve bitten me. That\'92s enough,\
isn\'92t it? Now tell me, what have I done to you?\'94\
\
The boy stared in amazement.\
\
\'93Though I don\'92t know you and it\'92s the first time I\'92ve seen you,\'94 Alyosha\
went on with the same serenity, \'93yet I must have done something to you\'97you\
wouldn\'92t have hurt me like this for nothing. So what have I done? How have\
I wronged you, tell me?\'94\
\
Instead of answering, the boy broke into a loud tearful wail and ran away.\
Alyosha walked slowly after him towards Mihailovsky Street, and for a long\
time he saw the child running in the distance as fast as ever, not turning\
his head, and no doubt still keeping up his tearful wail. He made up his\
mind to find him out as soon as he had time, and to solve this mystery.\
Just now he had not the time.\
\
\
\
Chapter IV. At The Hohlakovs\'92\
\
\
Alyosha soon reached Madame Hohlakov\'92s house, a handsome stone house of\
two stories, one of the finest in our town. Though Madame Hohlakov spent\
most of her time in another province where she had an estate, or in\
Moscow, where she had a house of her own, yet she had a house in our town\
too, inherited from her forefathers. The estate in our district was the\
largest of her three estates, yet she had been very little in our province\
before this time. She ran out to Alyosha in the hall.\
\
\'93Did you get my letter about the new miracle?\'94 She spoke rapidly and\
nervously.\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93Did you show it to every one? He restored the son to his mother!\'94\
\
\'93He is dying to\uc0\u8208 day,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93I have heard, I know, oh, how I long to talk to you, to you or some one,\
about all this. No, to you, to you! And how sorry I am I can\'92t see him!\
The whole town is in excitement, they are all suspense. But now\'97do you\
know Katerina Ivanovna is here now?\'94\
\
\'93Ah, that\'92s lucky,\'94 cried Alyosha. \'93Then I shall see her here. She told me\
yesterday to be sure to come and see her to\uc0\u8208 day.\'94\
\
\'93I know, I know all. I\'92ve heard exactly what happened yesterday\'97and the\
atrocious behavior of that\'97creature. _C\'92est tragique_, and if I\'92d been in\
her place I don\'92t know what I should have done. And your brother Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch, what do you think of him?\'97my goodness! Alexey Fyodorovitch,\
I am forgetting, only fancy; your brother is in there with her, not that\
dreadful brother who was so shocking yesterday, but the other, Ivan\
Fyodorovitch, he is sitting with her talking; they are having a serious\
conversation. If you could only imagine what\'92s passing between them\
now\'97it\'92s awful, I tell you it\'92s lacerating, it\'92s like some incredible tale\
of horror. They are ruining their lives for no reason any one can see.\
They both recognize it and revel in it. I\'92ve been watching for you! I\'92ve\
been thirsting for you! It\'92s too much for me, that\'92s the worst of it. I\'92ll\
tell you all about it presently, but now I must speak of something else,\
the most important thing\'97I had quite forgotten what\'92s most important. Tell\
me, why has Lise been in hysterics? As soon as she heard you were here,\
she began to be hysterical!\'94\
\
\'93_Maman_, it\'92s you who are hysterical now, not I,\'94 Lise\'92s voice caroled\
through a tiny crack of the door at the side. Her voice sounded as though\
she wanted to laugh, but was doing her utmost to control it. Alyosha at\
once noticed the crack, and no doubt Lise was peeping through it, but that\
he could not see.\
\
\'93And no wonder, Lise, no wonder ... your caprices will make me hysterical\
too. But she is so ill, Alexey Fyodorovitch, she has been so ill all\
night, feverish and moaning! I could hardly wait for the morning and for\
Herzenstube to come. He says that he can make nothing of it, that we must\
wait. Herzenstube always comes and says that he can make nothing of it. As\
soon as you approached the house, she screamed, fell into hysterics, and\
insisted on being wheeled back into this room here.\'94\
\
\'93Mamma, I didn\'92t know he had come. It wasn\'92t on his account I wanted to be\
wheeled into this room.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s not true, Lise, Yulia ran to tell you that Alexey Fyodorovitch was\
coming. She was on the look\uc0\u8208 out for you.\'94\
\
\'93My darling mamma, it\'92s not at all clever of you. But if you want to make\
up for it and say something very clever, dear mamma, you\'92d better tell our\
honored visitor, Alexey Fyodorovitch, that he has shown his want of wit by\
venturing to us after what happened yesterday and although every one is\
laughing at him.\'94\
\
\'93Lise, you go too far. I declare I shall have to be severe. Who laughs at\
him? I am so glad he has come, I need him, I can\'92t do without him. Oh,\
Alexey Fyodorovitch, I am exceedingly unhappy!\'94\
\
\'93But what\'92s the matter with you, mamma, darling?\'94\
\
\'93Ah, your caprices, Lise, your fidgetiness, your illness, that awful night\
of fever, that awful everlasting Herzenstube, everlasting, everlasting,\
that\'92s the worst of it! Everything, in fact, everything.... Even that\
miracle, too! Oh, how it has upset me, how it has shattered me, that\
miracle, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch! And that tragedy in the drawing\uc0\u8208 room,\
it\'92s more than I can bear, I warn you. I can\'92t bear it. A comedy, perhaps,\
not a tragedy. Tell me, will Father Zossima live till to\uc0\u8208 morrow, will he?\
Oh, my God! What is happening to me? Every minute I close my eyes and see\
that it\'92s all nonsense, all nonsense.\'94\
\
\'93I should be very grateful,\'94 Alyosha interrupted suddenly, \'93if you could\
give me a clean rag to bind up my finger with. I have hurt it, and it\'92s\
very painful.\'94\
\
Alyosha unbound his bitten finger. The handkerchief was soaked with blood.\
Madame Hohlakov screamed and shut her eyes.\
\
\'93Good heavens, what a wound, how awful!\'94\
\
But as soon as Lise saw Alyosha\'92s finger through the crack, she flung the\
door wide open.\
\
\'93Come, come here,\'94 she cried, imperiously. \'93No nonsense now! Good heavens,\
why did you stand there saying nothing about it all this time? He might\
have bled to death, mamma! How did you do it? Water, water! You must wash\
it first of all, simply hold it in cold water to stop the pain, and keep\
it there, keep it there.... Make haste, mamma, some water in a slop\uc0\u8208 basin.\
But do make haste,\'94 she finished nervously. She was quite frightened at\
the sight of Alyosha\'92s wound.\
\
\'93Shouldn\'92t we send for Herzenstube?\'94 cried Madame Hohlakov.\
\
\'93Mamma, you\'92ll be the death of me. Your Herzenstube will come and say that\
he can make nothing of it! Water, water! Mamma, for goodness\'92 sake go\
yourself and hurry Yulia, she is such a slowcoach and never can come\
quickly! Make haste, mamma, or I shall die.\'94\
\
\'93Why, it\'92s nothing much,\'94 cried Alyosha, frightened at this alarm.\
\
Yulia ran in with water and Alyosha put his finger in it.\
\
\'93Some lint, mamma, for mercy\'92s sake, bring some lint and that muddy\
caustic lotion for wounds, what\'92s it called? We\'92ve got some. You know\
where the bottle is, mamma; it\'92s in your bedroom in the right\uc0\u8208 hand\
cupboard, there\'92s a big bottle of it there with the lint.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll bring everything in a minute, Lise, only don\'92t scream and don\'92t\
fuss. You see how bravely Alexey Fyodorovitch bears it. Where did you get\
such a dreadful wound, Alexey Fyodorovitch?\'94\
\
Madame Hohlakov hastened away. This was all Lise was waiting for.\
\
\'93First of all, answer the question, where did you get hurt like this?\'94 she\
asked Alyosha, quickly. \'93And then I\'92ll talk to you about something quite\
different. Well?\'94\
\
Instinctively feeling that the time of her mother\'92s absence was precious\
for her, Alyosha hastened to tell her of his enigmatic meeting with the\
schoolboys in the fewest words possible. Lise clasped her hands at his\
story.\
\
\'93How can you, and in that dress too, associate with schoolboys?\'94 she cried\
angrily, as though she had a right to control him. \'93You are nothing but a\
boy yourself if you can do that, a perfect boy! But you must find out for\
me about that horrid boy and tell me all about it, for there\'92s some\
mystery in it. Now for the second thing, but first a question: does the\
pain prevent you talking about utterly unimportant things, but talking\
sensibly?\'94\
\
\'93Of course not, and I don\'92t feel much pain now.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s because your finger is in the water. It must be changed directly,\
for it will get warm in a minute. Yulia, bring some ice from the cellar\
and another basin of water. Now she is gone, I can speak; will you give me\
the letter I sent you yesterday, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch\'97be quick, for\
mamma will be back in a minute and I don\'92t want\'97\'94\
\
\'93I haven\'92t got the letter.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s not true, you have. I knew you would say that. You\'92ve got it in\
that pocket. I\'92ve been regretting that joke all night. Give me back the\
letter at once, give it me.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve left it at home.\'94\
\
\'93But you can\'92t consider me as a child, a little girl, after that silly\
joke! I beg your pardon for that silliness, but you must bring me the\
letter, if you really haven\'92t got it\'97bring it to\uc0\u8208 day, you must, you must.\'94\
\
\'93To\uc0\u8208 day I can\'92t possibly, for I am going back to the monastery and I\
shan\'92t come and see you for the next two days\'97three or four perhaps\'97for\
Father Zossima\'97\'94\
\
\'93Four days, what nonsense! Listen. Did you laugh at me very much?\'94\
\
\'93I didn\'92t laugh at all.\'94\
\
\'93Why not?\'94\
\
\'93Because I believed all you said.\'94\
\
\'93You are insulting me!\'94\
\
\'93Not at all. As soon as I read it, I thought that all that would come to\
pass, for as soon as Father Zossima dies, I am to leave the monastery.\
Then I shall go back and finish my studies, and when you reach the legal\
age we will be married. I shall love you. Though I haven\'92t had time to\
think about it, I believe I couldn\'92t find a better wife than you, and\
Father Zossima tells me I must marry.\'94\
\
\'93But I am a cripple, wheeled about in a chair,\'94 laughed Lise, flushing\
crimson.\
\
\'93I\'92ll wheel you about myself, but I\'92m sure you\'92ll get well by then.\'94\
\
\'93But you are mad,\'94 said Lise, nervously, \'93to make all this nonsense out of\
a joke! Here\'92s mamma, very _\'e0 propos_, perhaps. Mamma, how slow you always\
are, how can you be so long! And here\'92s Yulia with the ice!\'94\
\
\'93Oh, Lise, don\'92t scream, above all things don\'92t scream. That scream drives\
me ... How can I help it when you put the lint in another place? I\'92ve been\
hunting and hunting\'97I do believe you did it on purpose.\'94\
\
\'93But I couldn\'92t tell that he would come with a bad finger, or else perhaps\
I might have done it on purpose. My darling mamma, you begin to say really\
witty things.\'94\
\
\'93Never mind my being witty, but I must say you show nice feeling for\
Alexey Fyodorovitch\'92s sufferings! Oh, my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, what\'92s\
killing me is no one thing in particular, not Herzenstube, but everything\
together, that\'92s what is too much for me.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s enough, mamma, enough about Herzenstube,\'94 Lise laughed gayly.\
\'93Make haste with the lint and the lotion, mamma. That\'92s simply Goulard\'92s\
water, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I remember the name now, but it\'92s a splendid\
lotion. Would you believe it, mamma, on the way here he had a fight with\
the boys in the street, and it was a boy bit his finger, isn\'92t he a child,\
a child himself? Is he fit to be married after that? For only fancy, he\
wants to be married, mamma. Just think of him married, wouldn\'92t it be\
funny, wouldn\'92t it be awful?\'94\
\
And Lise kept laughing her thin hysterical giggle, looking slyly at\
Alyosha.\
\
\'93But why married, Lise? What makes you talk of such a thing? It\'92s quite\
out of place\'97and perhaps the boy was rabid.\'94\
\
\'93Why, mamma! As though there were rabid boys!\'94\
\
\'93Why not, Lise, as though I had said something stupid! Your boy might have\
been bitten by a mad dog and he would become mad and bite any one near\
him. How well she has bandaged it, Alexey Fyodorovitch! I couldn\'92t have\
done it. Do you still feel the pain?\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s nothing much now.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t feel afraid of water?\'94 asked Lise.\
\
\'93Come, that\'92s enough, Lise, perhaps I really was rather too quick talking\
of the boy being rabid, and you pounced upon it at once Katerina Ivanovna\
has only just heard that you are here, Alexey Fyodorovitch, she simply\
rushed at me, she\'92s dying to see you, dying!\'94\
\
\'93Ach, mamma, go to them yourself. He can\'92t go just now, he is in too much\
pain.\'94\
\
\'93Not at all, I can go quite well,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93What! You are going away? Is that what you say?\'94\
\
\'93Well, when I\'92ve seen them, I\'92ll come back here and we can talk as much as\
you like. But I should like to see Katerina Ivanovna at once, for I am\
very anxious to be back at the monastery as soon as I can.\'94\
\
\'93Mamma, take him away quickly. Alexey Fyodorovitch, don\'92t trouble to come\
and see me afterwards, but go straight back to your monastery and a good\
riddance. I want to sleep, I didn\'92t sleep all night.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, Lise, you are only making fun, but how I wish you would sleep!\'94 cried\
Madame Hohlakov.\
\
\'93I don\'92t know what I\'92ve done.... I\'92ll stay another three minutes, five if\
you like,\'94 muttered Alyosha.\
\
\'93Even five! Do take him away quickly, mamma, he is a monster.\'94\
\
\'93Lise, you are crazy. Let us go, Alexey Fyodorovitch, she is too\
capricious to\uc0\u8208 day. I am afraid to cross her. Oh, the trouble one has with\
nervous girls! Perhaps she really will be able to sleep after seeing you.\
How quickly you have made her sleepy, and how fortunate it is!\'94\
\
\'93Ah, mamma, how sweetly you talk! I must kiss you for it, mamma.\'94\
\
\'93And I kiss you too, Lise. Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch,\'94 Madame Hohlakov\
began mysteriously and importantly, speaking in a rapid whisper. \'93I don\'92t\
want to suggest anything, I don\'92t want to lift the veil, you will see for\
yourself what\'92s going on. It\'92s appalling. It\'92s the most fantastic farce.\
She loves your brother, Ivan, and she is doing her utmost to persuade\
herself she loves your brother, Dmitri. It\'92s appalling! I\'92ll go in with\
you, and if they don\'92t turn me out, I\'92ll stay to the end.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter V. A Laceration In The Drawing\uc0\u8208 Room\
\
\
But in the drawing\uc0\u8208 room the conversation was already over. Katerina\
Ivanovna was greatly excited, though she looked resolute. At the moment\
Alyosha and Madame Hohlakov entered, Ivan Fyodorovitch stood up to take\
leave. His face was rather pale, and Alyosha looked at him anxiously. For\
this moment was to solve a doubt, a harassing enigma which had for some\
time haunted Alyosha. During the preceding month it had been several times\
suggested to him that his brother Ivan was in love with Katerina Ivanovna,\
and, what was more, that he meant \'93to carry her off\'94 from Dmitri. Until\
quite lately the idea seemed to Alyosha monstrous, though it worried him\
extremely. He loved both his brothers, and dreaded such rivalry between\
them. Meantime, Dmitri had said outright on the previous day that he was\
glad that Ivan was his rival, and that it was a great assistance to him,\
Dmitri. In what way did it assist him? To marry Grushenka? But that\
Alyosha considered the worst thing possible. Besides all this, Alyosha had\
till the evening before implicitly believed that Katerina Ivanovna had a\
steadfast and passionate love for Dmitri; but he had only believed it till\
the evening before. He had fancied, too, that she was incapable of loving\
a man like Ivan, and that she did love Dmitri, and loved him just as he\
was, in spite of all the strangeness of such a passion.\
\
But during yesterday\'92s scene with Grushenka another idea had struck him.\
The word \'93lacerating,\'94 which Madame Hohlakov had just uttered, almost made\
him start, because half waking up towards daybreak that night he had cried\
out \'93Laceration, laceration,\'94 probably applying it to his dream. He had\
been dreaming all night of the previous day\'92s scene at Katerina\
Ivanovna\'92s. Now Alyosha was impressed by Madame Hohlakov\'92s blunt and\
persistent assertion that Katerina Ivanovna was in love with Ivan, and\
only deceived herself through some sort of pose, from \'93self\uc0\u8208 laceration,\'94\
and tortured herself by her pretended love for Dmitri from some fancied\
duty of gratitude. \'93Yes,\'94 he thought, \'93perhaps the whole truth lies in\
those words.\'94 But in that case what was Ivan\'92s position? Alyosha felt\
instinctively that a character like Katerina Ivanovna\'92s must dominate, and\
she could only dominate some one like Dmitri, and never a man like Ivan.\
For Dmitri might at last submit to her domination \'93to his own happiness\'94\
(which was what Alyosha would have desired), but Ivan\'97no, Ivan could not\
submit to her, and such submission would not give him happiness. Alyosha\
could not help believing that of Ivan. And now all these doubts and\
reflections flitted through his mind as he entered the drawing\uc0\u8208 room.\
Another idea, too, forced itself upon him: \'93What if she loved neither of\
them\'97neither Ivan nor Dmitri?\'94\
\
It must be noted that Alyosha felt as it were ashamed of his own thoughts\
and blamed himself when they kept recurring to him during the last month.\
\'93What do I know about love and women and how can I decide such questions?\'94\
he thought reproachfully, after such doubts and surmises. And yet it was\
impossible not to think about it. He felt instinctively that this rivalry\
was of immense importance in his brothers\'92 lives and that a great deal\
depended upon it.\
\
\'93One reptile will devour the other,\'94 Ivan had pronounced the day before,\
speaking in anger of his father and Dmitri. So Ivan looked upon Dmitri as\
a reptile, and perhaps had long done so. Was it perhaps since he had known\
Katerina Ivanovna? That phrase had, of course, escaped Ivan unawares\
yesterday, but that only made it more important. If he felt like that,\
what chance was there of peace? Were there not, on the contrary, new\
grounds for hatred and hostility in their family? And with which of them\
was Alyosha to sympathize? And what was he to wish for each of them? He\
loved them both, but what could he desire for each in the midst of these\
conflicting interests? He might go quite astray in this maze, and\
Alyosha\'92s heart could not endure uncertainty, because his love was always\
of an active character. He was incapable of passive love. If he loved any\
one, he set to work at once to help him. And to do so he must know what he\
was aiming at; he must know for certain what was best for each, and having\
ascertained this it was natural for him to help them both. But instead of\
a definite aim, he found nothing but uncertainty and perplexity on all\
sides. \'93It was lacerating,\'94 as was said just now. But what could he\
understand even in this \'93laceration\'94? He did not understand the first word\
in this perplexing maze.\
\
Seeing Alyosha, Katerina Ivanovna said quickly and joyfully to Ivan, who\
had already got up to go, \'93A minute! Stay another minute! I want to hear\
the opinion of this person here whom I trust absolutely. Don\'92t go away,\'94\
she added, addressing Madame Hohlakov. She made Alyosha sit down beside\
her, and Madame Hohlakov sat opposite, by Ivan.\
\
\'93You are all my friends here, all I have in the world, my dear friends,\'94\
she began warmly, in a voice which quivered with genuine tears of\
suffering, and Alyosha\'92s heart warmed to her at once. \'93You, Alexey\
Fyodorovitch, were witness yesterday of that abominable scene, and saw\
what I did. You did not see it, Ivan Fyodorovitch, he did. What he thought\
of me yesterday I don\'92t know. I only know one thing, that if it were\
repeated to\uc0\u8208 day, this minute, I should express the same feelings again as\
yesterday\'97the same feelings, the same words, the same actions. You\
remember my actions, Alexey Fyodorovitch; you checked me in one of them\'94\
... (as she said that, she flushed and her eyes shone). \'93I must tell you\
that I can\'92t get over it. Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch. I don\'92t even know\
whether I still love _him_. I feel _pity_ for him, and that is a poor sign\
of love. If I loved him, if I still loved him, perhaps I shouldn\'92t be\
sorry for him now, but should hate him.\'94\
\
Her voice quivered, and tears glittered on her eyelashes. Alyosha\
shuddered inwardly. \'93That girl is truthful and sincere,\'94 he thought, \'93and\
she does not love Dmitri any more.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s true, that\'92s true,\'94 cried Madame Hohlakov.\
\
\'93Wait, dear. I haven\'92t told you the chief, the final decision I came to\
during the night. I feel that perhaps my decision is a terrible one\'97for\
me, but I foresee that nothing will induce me to change it\'97nothing. It\
will be so all my life. My dear, kind, ever\uc0\u8208 faithful and generous adviser,\
the one friend I have in the world, Ivan Fyodorovitch, with his deep\
insight into the heart, approves and commends my decision. He knows it.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I approve of it,\'94 Ivan assented, in a subdued but firm voice.\
\
\'93But I should like Alyosha, too (Ah! Alexey Fyodorovitch, forgive my\
calling you simply Alyosha), I should like Alexey Fyodorovitch, too, to\
tell me before my two friends whether I am right. I feel instinctively\
that you, Alyosha, my dear brother (for you are a dear brother to me),\'94\
she said again ecstatically, taking his cold hand in her hot one, \'93I\
foresee that your decision, your approval, will bring me peace, in spite\
of all my sufferings, for, after your words, I shall be calm and submit\'97I\
feel that.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know what you are asking me,\'94 said Alyosha, flushing. \'93I only\
know that I love you and at this moment wish for your happiness more than\
my own!... But I know nothing about such affairs,\'94 something impelled him\
to add hurriedly.\
\
\'93In such affairs, Alexey Fyodorovitch, in such affairs, the chief thing is\
honor and duty and something higher\'97I don\'92t know what\'97but higher perhaps\
even than duty. I am conscious of this irresistible feeling in my heart,\
and it compels me irresistibly. But it may all be put in two words. I\'92ve\
already decided, even if he marries that\'97creature,\'94 she began solemnly,\
\'93whom I never, never can forgive, _even then I will not abandon him_.\
Henceforward I will never, never abandon him!\'94 she cried, breaking into a\
sort of pale, hysterical ecstasy. \'93Not that I would run after him\
continually, get in his way and worry him. Oh, no! I will go away to\
another town\'97where you like\'97but I will watch over him all my life\'97I will\
watch over him all my life unceasingly. When he becomes unhappy with that\
woman, and that is bound to happen quite soon, let him come to me and he\
will find a friend, a sister.... Only a sister, of course, and so for\
ever; but he will learn at least that that sister is really his sister,\
who loves him and has sacrificed all her life to him. I will gain my\
point. I will insist on his knowing me and confiding entirely in me,\
without reserve,\'94 she cried, in a sort of frenzy. \'93I will be a god to whom\
he can pray\'97and that, at least, he owes me for his treachery and for what\
I suffered yesterday through him. And let him see that all my life I will\
be true to him and the promise I gave him, in spite of his being untrue\
and betraying me. I will\'97I will become nothing but a means for his\
happiness, or\'97how shall I say?\'97an instrument, a machine for his happiness,\
and that for my whole life, my whole life, and that he may see that all\
his life! That\'92s my decision. Ivan Fyodorovitch fully approves me.\'94\
\
She was breathless. She had perhaps intended to express her idea with more\
dignity, art and naturalness, but her speech was too hurried and crude. It\
was full of youthful impulsiveness, it betrayed that she was still\
smarting from yesterday\'92s insult, and that her pride craved satisfaction.\
She felt this herself. Her face suddenly darkened, an unpleasant look came\
into her eyes. Alyosha at once saw it and felt a pang of sympathy. His\
brother Ivan made it worse by adding:\
\
\'93I\'92ve only expressed my own view,\'94 he said. \'93From any one else, this would\
have been affected and overstrained, but from you\'97no. Any other woman\
would have been wrong, but you are right. I don\'92t know how to explain it,\
but I see that you are absolutely genuine and, therefore, you are right.\'94\
\
\'93But that\'92s only for the moment. And what does this moment stand for?\
Nothing but yesterday\'92s insult.\'94 Madame Hohlakov obviously had not\
intended to interfere, but she could not refrain from this very just\
comment.\
\
\'93Quite so, quite so,\'94 cried Ivan, with peculiar eagerness, obviously\
annoyed at being interrupted, \'93in any one else this moment would be only\
due to yesterday\'92s impression and would be only a moment. But with\
Katerina Ivanovna\'92s character, that moment will last all her life. What\
for any one else would be only a promise is for her an everlasting\
burdensome, grim perhaps, but unflagging duty. And she will be sustained\
by the feeling of this duty being fulfilled. Your life, Katerina Ivanovna,\
will henceforth be spent in painful brooding over your own feelings, your\
own heroism, and your own suffering; but in the end that suffering will be\
softened and will pass into sweet contemplation of the fulfillment of a\
bold and proud design. Yes, proud it certainly is, and desperate in any\
case, but a triumph for you. And the consciousness of it will at last be a\
source of complete satisfaction and will make you resigned to everything\
else.\'94\
\
This was unmistakably said with some malice and obviously with intention;\
even perhaps with no desire to conceal that he spoke ironically and with\
intention.\
\
\'93Oh, dear, how mistaken it all is!\'94 Madame Hohlakov cried again.\
\
\'93Alexey Fyodorovitch, you speak. I want dreadfully to know what you will\
say!\'94 cried Katerina Ivanovna, and burst into tears. Alyosha got up from\
the sofa.\
\
\'93It\'92s nothing, nothing!\'94 she went on through her tears. \'93I\'92m upset, I\
didn\'92t sleep last night. But by the side of two such friends as you and\
your brother I still feel strong\'97for I know\'97you two will never desert me.\'94\
\
\'93Unluckily I am obliged to return to Moscow\'97perhaps to\uc0\u8208 morrow\'97and to leave\
you for a long time\'97And, unluckily, it\'92s unavoidable,\'94 Ivan said suddenly.\
\
\'93To\uc0\u8208 morrow\'97to Moscow!\'94 her face was suddenly contorted; \'93but\'97but, dear me,\
how fortunate!\'94 she cried in a voice suddenly changed. In one instant\
there was no trace left of her tears. She underwent an instantaneous\
transformation, which amazed Alyosha. Instead of a poor, insulted girl,\
weeping in a sort of \'93laceration,\'94 he saw a woman completely self\uc0\u8208 \
possessed and even exceedingly pleased, as though something agreeable had\
just happened.\
\
\'93Oh, not fortunate that I am losing you, of course not,\'94 she corrected\
herself suddenly, with a charming society smile. \'93Such a friend as you are\
could not suppose that. I am only too unhappy at losing you.\'94 She rushed\
impulsively at Ivan, and seizing both his hands, pressed them warmly. \'93But\
what is fortunate is that you will be able in Moscow to see auntie and\
Agafya and to tell them all the horror of my present position. You can\
speak with complete openness to Agafya, but spare dear auntie. You will\
know how to do that. You can\'92t think how wretched I was yesterday and this\
morning, wondering how I could write them that dreadful letter\'97for one can\
never tell such things in a letter.... Now it will be easy for me to\
write, for you will see them and explain everything. Oh, how glad I am!\
But I am only glad of that, believe me. Of course, no one can take your\
place.... I will run at once to write the letter,\'94 she finished suddenly,\
and took a step as though to go out of the room.\
\
\'93And what about Alyosha and his opinion, which you were so desperately\
anxious to hear?\'94 cried Madame Hohlakov. There was a sarcastic, angry note\
in her voice.\
\
\'93I had not forgotten that,\'94 cried Katerina Ivanovna, coming to a sudden\
standstill, \'93and why are you so antagonistic at such a moment?\'94 she added,\
with warm and bitter reproachfulness. \'93What I said, I repeat. I must have\
his opinion. More than that, I must have his decision! As he says, so it\
shall be. You see how anxious I am for your words, Alexey Fyodorovitch....\
But what\'92s the matter?\'94\
\
\'93I couldn\'92t have believed it. I can\'92t understand it!\'94 Alyosha cried\
suddenly in distress.\
\
\'93What? What?\'94\
\
\'93He is going to Moscow, and you cry out that you are glad. You said that\
on purpose! And you begin explaining that you are not glad of that but\
sorry to be\'97losing a friend. But that was acting, too\'97you were playing a\
part\'97as in a theater!\'94\
\
\'93In a theater? What? What do you mean?\'94 exclaimed Katerina Ivanovna,\
profoundly astonished, flushing crimson, and frowning.\
\
\'93Though you assure him you are sorry to lose a friend in him, you persist\
in telling him to his face that it\'92s fortunate he is going,\'94 said Alyosha\
breathlessly. He was standing at the table and did not sit down.\
\
\'93What are you talking about? I don\'92t understand.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t understand myself.... I seemed to see in a flash ... I know I am\
not saying it properly, but I\'92ll say it all the same,\'94 Alyosha went on in\
the same shaking and broken voice. \'93What I see is that perhaps you don\'92t\
love Dmitri at all ... and never have, from the beginning.... And Dmitri,\
too, has never loved you ... and only esteems you.... I really don\'92t know\
how I dare to say all this, but somebody must tell the truth ... for\
nobody here will tell the truth.\'94\
\
\'93What truth?\'94 cried Katerina Ivanovna, and there was an hysterical ring in\
her voice.\
\
\'93I\'92ll tell you,\'94 Alyosha went on with desperate haste, as though he were\
jumping from the top of a house. \'93Call Dmitri; I will fetch him\'97and let\
him come here and take your hand and take Ivan\'92s and join your hands. For\
you\'92re torturing Ivan, simply because you love him\'97and torturing him,\
because you love Dmitri through \'91self\uc0\u8208 laceration\'92\'97with an unreal\
love\'97because you\'92ve persuaded yourself.\'94\
\
Alyosha broke off and was silent.\
\
\'93You ... you ... you are a little religious idiot\'97that\'92s what you are!\'94\
Katerina Ivanovna snapped. Her face was white and her lips were moving\
with anger.\
\
Ivan suddenly laughed and got up. His hat was in his hand.\
\
\'93You are mistaken, my good Alyosha,\'94 he said, with an expression Alyosha\
had never seen in his face before\'97an expression of youthful sincerity and\
strong, irresistibly frank feeling. \'93Katerina Ivanovna has never cared for\
me! She has known all the time that I cared for her\'97though I never said a\
word of my love to her\'97she knew, but she didn\'92t care for me. I have never\
been her friend either, not for one moment; she is too proud to need my\
friendship. She kept me at her side as a means of revenge. She revenged\
with me and on me all the insults which she has been continually receiving\
from Dmitri ever since their first meeting. For even that first meeting\
has rankled in her heart as an insult\'97that\'92s what her heart is like! She\
has talked to me of nothing but her love for him. I am going now; but,\
believe me, Katerina Ivanovna, you really love him. And the more he\
insults you, the more you love him\'97that\'92s your \'91laceration.\'92 You love him\
just as he is; you love him for insulting you. If he reformed, you\'92d give\
him up at once and cease to love him. But you need him so as to\
contemplate continually your heroic fidelity and to reproach him for\
infidelity. And it all comes from your pride. Oh, there\'92s a great deal of\
humiliation and self\uc0\u8208 abasement about it, but it all comes from pride.... I\
am too young and I\'92ve loved you too much. I know that I ought not to say\
this, that it would be more dignified on my part simply to leave you, and\
it would be less offensive for you. But I am going far away, and shall\
never come back.... It is for ever. I don\'92t want to sit beside a\
\'91laceration.\'92... But I don\'92t know how to speak now. I\'92ve said\
everything.... Good\uc0\u8208 by, Katerina Ivanovna; you can\'92t be angry with me, for\
I am a hundred times more severely punished than you, if only by the fact\
that I shall never see you again. Good\uc0\u8208 by! I don\'92t want your hand. You\
have tortured me too deliberately for me to be able to forgive you at this\
moment. I shall forgive you later, but now I don\'92t want your hand. \'91Den\
Dank, Dame, begehr ich nicht,\'92 \'94 he added, with a forced smile, showing,\
however, that he could read Schiller, and read him till he knew him by\
heart\'97which Alyosha would never have believed. He went out of the room\
without saying good\uc0\u8208 by even to his hostess, Madame Hohlakov. Alyosha\
clasped his hands.\
\
\'93Ivan!\'94 he cried desperately after him. \'93Come back, Ivan! No, nothing will\
induce him to come back now!\'94 he cried again, regretfully realizing it;\
\'93but it\'92s my fault, my fault. I began it! Ivan spoke angrily, wrongly.\
Unjustly and angrily. He must come back here, come back,\'94 Alyosha kept\
exclaiming frantically.\
\
Katerina Ivanovna went suddenly into the next room.\
\
\'93You have done no harm. You behaved beautifully, like an angel,\'94 Madame\
Hohlakov whispered rapidly and ecstatically to Alyosha. \'93I will do my\
utmost to prevent Ivan Fyodorovitch from going.\'94\
\
Her face beamed with delight, to the great distress of Alyosha, but\
Katerina Ivanovna suddenly returned. She had two hundred\uc0\u8208 rouble notes in\
her hand.\
\
\'93I have a great favor to ask of you, Alexey Fyodorovitch,\'94 she began,\
addressing Alyosha with an apparently calm and even voice, as though\
nothing had happened. \'93A week\'97yes, I think it was a week ago\'97Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch was guilty of a hasty and unjust action\'97a very ugly action.\
There is a low tavern here, and in it he met that discharged officer, that\
captain, whom your father used to employ in some business. Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch somehow lost his temper with this captain, seized him by the\
beard and dragged him out into the street and for some distance along it,\
in that insulting fashion. And I am told that his son, a boy, quite a\
child, who is at the school here, saw it and ran beside them crying and\
begging for his father, appealing to every one to defend him, while every\
one laughed. You must forgive me, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I cannot think\
without indignation of that disgraceful action of _his_ ... one of those\
actions of which only Dmitri Fyodorovitch would be capable in his anger\
... and in his passions! I can\'92t describe it even.... I can\'92t find my\
words. I\'92ve made inquiries about his victim, and find he is quite a poor\
man. His name is Snegiryov. He did something wrong in the army and was\
discharged. I can\'92t tell you what. And now he has sunk into terrible\
destitution, with his family\'97an unhappy family of sick children, and, I\
believe, an insane wife. He has been living here a long time; he used to\
work as a copying clerk, but now he is getting nothing. I thought if you\
... that is I thought ... I don\'92t know. I am so confused. You see, I\
wanted to ask you, my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, to go to him, to find some\
excuse to go to them\'97I mean to that captain\'97oh, goodness, how badly I\
explain it!\'97and delicately, carefully, as only you know how to\'94 (Alyosha\
blushed), \'93manage to give him this assistance, these two hundred roubles.\
He will be sure to take it.... I mean, persuade him to take it.... Or,\
rather, what do I mean? You see it\'92s not by way of compensation to prevent\
him from taking proceedings (for I believe he meant to), but simply a\
token of sympathy, of a desire to assist him from me, Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch\'92s betrothed, not from himself.... But you know.... I would go\
myself, but you\'92ll know how to do it ever so much better. He lives in Lake\
Street, in the house of a woman called Kalmikov.... For God\'92s sake, Alexey\
Fyodorovitch, do it for me, and now ... now I am rather ... tired. Good\uc0\u8208 \
by!\'94\
\
She turned and disappeared behind the porti\'e8re so quickly that Alyosha had\
not time to utter a word, though he wanted to speak. He longed to beg her\
pardon, to blame himself, to say something, for his heart was full and he\
could not bear to go out of the room without it. But Madame Hohlakov took\
him by the hand and drew him along with her. In the hall she stopped him\
again as before.\
\
\'93She is proud, she is struggling with herself; but kind, charming,\
generous,\'94 she exclaimed, in a half\uc0\u8208 whisper. \'93Oh, how I love her,\
especially sometimes, and how glad I am again of everything! Dear Alexey\
Fyodorovitch, you didn\'92t know, but I must tell you, that we all, all\'97both\
her aunts, I and all of us, Lise, even\'97have been hoping and praying for\
nothing for the last month but that she may give up your favorite Dmitri,\
who takes no notice of her and does not care for her, and may marry Ivan\
Fyodorovitch\'97such an excellent and cultivated young man, who loves her\
more than anything in the world. We are in a regular plot to bring it\
about, and I am even staying on here perhaps on that account.\'94\
\
\'93But she has been crying\'97she has been wounded again,\'94 cried Alyosha.\
\
\'93Never trust a woman\'92s tears, Alexey Fyodorovitch. I am never for the\
women in such cases. I am always on the side of the men.\'94\
\
\'93Mamma, you are spoiling him,\'94 Lise\'92s little voice cried from behind the\
door.\
\
\'93No, it was all my fault. I am horribly to blame,\'94 Alyosha repeated\
unconsoled, hiding his face in his hands in an agony of remorse for his\
indiscretion.\
\
\'93Quite the contrary; you behaved like an angel, like an angel. I am ready\
to say so a thousand times over.\'94\
\
\'93Mamma, how has he behaved like an angel?\'94 Lise\'92s voice was heard again.\
\
\'93I somehow fancied all at once,\'94 Alyosha went on as though he had not\
heard Lise, \'93that she loved Ivan, and so I said that stupid thing.... What\
will happen now?\'94\
\
\'93To whom, to whom?\'94 cried Lise. \'93Mamma, you really want to be the death of\
me. I ask you and you don\'92t answer.\'94\
\
At the moment the maid ran in.\
\
\'93Katerina Ivanovna is ill.... She is crying, struggling ... hysterics.\'94\
\
\'93What is the matter?\'94 cried Lise, in a tone of real anxiety. \'93Mamma, I\
shall be having hysterics, and not she!\'94\
\
\'93Lise, for mercy\'92s sake, don\'92t scream, don\'92t persecute me. At your age one\
can\'92t know everything that grown\uc0\u8208 up people know. I\'92ll come and tell you\
everything you ought to know. Oh, mercy on us! I am coming, I am\
coming.... Hysterics is a good sign, Alexey Fyodorovitch; it\'92s an\
excellent thing that she is hysterical. That\'92s just as it ought to be. In\
such cases I am always against the woman, against all these feminine tears\
and hysterics. Run and say, Yulia, that I\'92ll fly to her. As for Ivan\
Fyodorovitch\'92s going away like that, it\'92s her own fault. But he won\'92t go\
away. Lise, for mercy\'92s sake, don\'92t scream! Oh, yes; you are not\
screaming. It\'92s I am screaming. Forgive your mamma; but I am delighted,\
delighted, delighted! Did you notice, Alexey Fyodorovitch, how young, how\
young Ivan Fyodorovitch was just now when he went out, when he said all\
that and went out? I thought he was so learned, such a _savant_, and all\
of a sudden he behaved so warmly, openly, and youthfully, with such\
youthful inexperience, and it was all so fine, like you.... And the way he\
repeated that German verse, it was just like you! But I must fly, I must\
fly! Alexey Fyodorovitch, make haste to carry out her commission, and then\
make haste back. Lise, do you want anything now? For mercy\'92s sake, don\'92t\
keep Alexey Fyodorovitch a minute. He will come back to you at once.\'94\
\
Madame Hohlakov at last ran off. Before leaving, Alyosha would have opened\
the door to see Lise.\
\
\'93On no account,\'94 cried Lise. \'93On no account now. Speak through the door.\
How have you come to be an angel? That\'92s the only thing I want to know.\'94\
\
\'93For an awful piece of stupidity, Lise! Good\uc0\u8208 by!\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t dare to go away like that!\'94 Lise was beginning.\
\
\'93Lise, I have a real sorrow! I\'92ll be back directly, but I have a great,\
great sorrow!\'94\
\
And he ran out of the room.\
\
\
\
Chapter VI. A Laceration In The Cottage\
\
\
He certainly was really grieved in a way he had seldom been before. He had\
rushed in like a fool, and meddled in what? In a love\uc0\u8208 affair. \'93But what do\
I know about it? What can I tell about such things?\'94 he repeated to\
himself for the hundredth time, flushing crimson. \'93Oh, being ashamed would\
be nothing; shame is only the punishment I deserve. The trouble is I shall\
certainly have caused more unhappiness.... And Father Zossima sent me to\
reconcile and bring them together. Is this the way to bring them\
together?\'94 Then he suddenly remembered how he had tried to join their\
hands, and he felt fearfully ashamed again. \'93Though I acted quite\
sincerely, I must be more sensible in the future,\'94 he concluded suddenly,\
and did not even smile at his conclusion.\
\
Katerina Ivanovna\'92s commission took him to Lake Street, and his brother\
Dmitri lived close by, in a turning out of Lake Street. Alyosha decided to\
go to him in any case before going to the captain, though he had a\
presentiment that he would not find his brother. He suspected that he\
would intentionally keep out of his way now, but he must find him anyhow.\
Time was passing: the thought of his dying elder had not left Alyosha for\
one minute from the time he set off from the monastery.\
\
There was one point which interested him particularly about Katerina\
Ivanovna\'92s commission; when she had mentioned the captain\'92s son, the\
little schoolboy who had run beside his father crying, the idea had at\
once struck Alyosha that this must be the schoolboy who had bitten his\
finger when he, Alyosha, asked him what he had done to hurt him. Now\
Alyosha felt practically certain of this, though he could not have said\
why. Thinking of another subject was a relief, and he resolved to think no\
more about the \'93mischief\'94 he had done, and not to torture himself with\
remorse, but to do what he had to do, let come what would. At that thought\
he was completely comforted. Turning to the street where Dmitri lodged, he\
felt hungry, and taking out of his pocket the roll he had brought from his\
father\'92s, he ate it. It made him feel stronger.\
\
Dmitri was not at home. The people of the house, an old cabinet\uc0\u8208 maker, his\
son, and his old wife, looked with positive suspicion at Alyosha. \'93He\
hasn\'92t slept here for the last three nights. Maybe he has gone away,\'94 the\
old man said in answer to Alyosha\'92s persistent inquiries. Alyosha saw that\
he was answering in accordance with instructions. When he asked whether he\
were not at Grushenka\'92s or in hiding at Foma\'92s (Alyosha spoke so freely on\
purpose), all three looked at him in alarm. \'93They are fond of him, they\
are doing their best for him,\'94 thought Alyosha. \'93That\'92s good.\'94\
\
At last he found the house in Lake Street. It was a decrepit little house,\
sunk on one side, with three windows looking into the street, and with a\
muddy yard, in the middle of which stood a solitary cow. He crossed the\
yard and found the door opening into the passage. On the left of the\
passage lived the old woman of the house with her old daughter. Both\
seemed to be deaf. In answer to his repeated inquiry for the captain, one\
of them at last understood that he was asking for their lodgers, and\
pointed to a door across the passage. The captain\'92s lodging turned out to\
be a simple cottage room. Alyosha had his hand on the iron latch to open\
the door, when he was struck by the strange hush within. Yet he knew from\
Katerina Ivanovna\'92s words that the man had a family. \'93Either they are all\
asleep or perhaps they have heard me coming and are waiting for me to open\
the door. I\'92d better knock first,\'94 and he knocked. An answer came, but not\
at once, after an interval of perhaps ten seconds.\
\
\'93Who\'92s there?\'94 shouted some one in a loud and very angry voice.\
\
Then Alyosha opened the door and crossed the threshold. He found himself\
in a regular peasant\'92s room. Though it was large, it was cumbered up with\
domestic belongings of all sorts, and there were several people in it. On\
the left was a large Russian stove. From the stove to the window on the\
left was a string running across the room, and on it there were rags\
hanging. There was a bedstead against the wall on each side, right and\
left, covered with knitted quilts. On the one on the left was a pyramid of\
four print\uc0\u8208 covered pillows, each smaller than the one beneath. On the\
other there was only one very small pillow. The opposite corner was\
screened off by a curtain or a sheet hung on a string. Behind this curtain\
could be seen a bed made up on a bench and a chair. The rough square table\
of plain wood had been moved into the middle window. The three windows,\
which consisted each of four tiny greenish mildewy panes, gave little\
light, and were close shut, so that the room was not very light and rather\
stuffy. On the table was a frying\uc0\u8208 pan with the remains of some fried eggs,\
a half\uc0\u8208 eaten piece of bread, and a small bottle with a few drops of vodka.\
\
A woman of genteel appearance, wearing a cotton gown, was sitting on a\
chair by the bed on the left. Her face was thin and yellow, and her sunken\
cheeks betrayed at the first glance that she was ill. But what struck\
Alyosha most was the expression in the poor woman\'92s eyes\'97a look of\
surprised inquiry and yet of haughty pride. And while he was talking to\
her husband, her big brown eyes moved from one speaker to the other with\
the same haughty and questioning expression. Beside her at the window\
stood a young girl, rather plain, with scanty reddish hair, poorly but\
very neatly dressed. She looked disdainfully at Alyosha as he came in.\
Beside the other bed was sitting another female figure. She was a very sad\
sight, a young girl of about twenty, but hunchback and crippled \'93with\
withered legs,\'94 as Alyosha was told afterwards. Her crutches stood in the\
corner close by. The strikingly beautiful and gentle eyes of this poor\
girl looked with mild serenity at Alyosha. A man of forty\uc0\u8208 five was sitting\
at the table, finishing the fried eggs. He was spare, small and weakly\
built. He had reddish hair and a scanty light\uc0\u8208 colored beard, very much\
like a wisp of tow (this comparison and the phrase \'93a wisp of tow\'94 flashed\
at once into Alyosha\'92s mind for some reason, he remembered it afterwards).\
It was obviously this gentleman who had shouted to him, as there was no\
other man in the room. But when Alyosha went in, he leapt up from the\
bench on which he was sitting, and, hastily wiping his mouth with a ragged\
napkin, darted up to Alyosha.\
\
\'93It\'92s a monk come to beg for the monastery. A nice place to come to!\'94 the\
girl standing in the left corner said aloud. The man spun round instantly\
towards her and answered her in an excited and breaking voice:\
\
\'93No, Varvara, you are wrong. Allow me to ask,\'94 he turned again to Alyosha,\
\'93what has brought you to\'97our retreat?\'94\
\
Alyosha looked attentively at him. It was the first time he had seen him.\
There was something angular, flurried and irritable about him. Though he\
had obviously just been drinking, he was not drunk. There was\
extraordinary impudence in his expression, and yet, strange to say, at the\
same time there was fear. He looked like a man who had long been kept in\
subjection and had submitted to it, and now had suddenly turned and was\
trying to assert himself. Or, better still, like a man who wants\
dreadfully to hit you but is horribly afraid you will hit him. In his\
words and in the intonation of his shrill voice there was a sort of crazy\
humor, at times spiteful and at times cringing, and continually shifting\
from one tone to another. The question about \'93our retreat\'94 he had asked as\
it were quivering all over, rolling his eyes, and skipping up so close to\
Alyosha that he instinctively drew back a step. He was dressed in a very\
shabby dark cotton coat, patched and spotted. He wore checked trousers of\
an extremely light color, long out of fashion, and of very thin material.\
They were so crumpled and so short that he looked as though he had grown\
out of them like a boy.\
\
\'93I am Alexey Karamazov,\'94 Alyosha began in reply.\
\
\'93I quite understand that, sir,\'94 the gentleman snapped out at once to\
assure him that he knew who he was already. \'93I am Captain Snegiryov, sir,\
but I am still desirous to know precisely what has led you\'97\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I\'92ve come for nothing special. I wanted to have a word with you\'97if\
only you allow me.\'94\
\
\'93In that case, here is a chair, sir; kindly be seated. That\'92s what they\
used to say in the old comedies, \'91kindly be seated,\'92 \'94 and with a rapid\
gesture he seized an empty chair (it was a rough wooden chair, not\
upholstered) and set it for him almost in the middle of the room; then,\
taking another similar chair for himself, he sat down facing Alyosha, so\
close to him that their knees almost touched.\
\
\'93Nikolay Ilyitch Snegiryov, sir, formerly a captain in the Russian\
infantry, put to shame for his vices, but still a captain. Though I might\
not be one now for the way I talk; for the last half of my life I\'92ve\
learnt to say \'91sir.\'92 It\'92s a word you use when you\'92ve come down in the\
world.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s very true,\'94 smiled Alyosha. \'93But is it used involuntarily or on\
purpose?\'94\
\
\'93As God\'92s above, it\'92s involuntary, and I usen\'92t to use it! I didn\'92t use\
the word \'91sir\'92 all my life, but as soon as I sank into low water I began\
to say \'91sir.\'92 It\'92s the work of a higher power. I see you are interested in\
contemporary questions, but how can I have excited your curiosity, living\
as I do in surroundings impossible for the exercise of hospitality?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve come\'97about that business.\'94\
\
\'93About what business?\'94 the captain interrupted impatiently.\
\
\'93About your meeting with my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94 Alyosha blurted\
out awkwardly.\
\
\'93What meeting, sir? You don\'92t mean that meeting? About my \'91wisp of tow,\'92\
then?\'94 He moved closer so that his knees positively knocked against\
Alyosha. His lips were strangely compressed like a thread.\
\
\'93What wisp of tow?\'94 muttered Alyosha.\
\
\'93He is come to complain of me, father!\'94 cried a voice familiar to\
Alyosha\'97the voice of the schoolboy\'97from behind the curtain. \'93I bit his\
finger just now.\'94 The curtain was pulled, and Alyosha saw his assailant\
lying on a little bed made up on the bench and the chair in the corner\
under the ikons. The boy lay covered by his coat and an old wadded quilt.\
He was evidently unwell, and, judging by his glittering eyes, he was in a\
fever. He looked at Alyosha without fear, as though he felt he was at home\
and could not be touched.\
\
\'93What! Did he bite your finger?\'94 The captain jumped up from his chair.\
\'93Was it your finger he bit?\'94\
\
\'93Yes. He was throwing stones with other schoolboys. There were six of them\
against him alone. I went up to him, and he threw a stone at me and then\
another at my head. I asked him what I had done to him. And then he rushed\
at me and bit my finger badly, I don\'92t know why.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll thrash him, sir, at once\'97this minute!\'94 The captain jumped up from\
his seat.\
\
\'93But I am not complaining at all, I am simply telling you ... I don\'92t want\
him to be thrashed. Besides, he seems to be ill.\'94\
\
\'93And do you suppose I\'92d thrash him? That I\'92d take my Ilusha and thrash him\
before you for your satisfaction? Would you like it done at once, sir?\'94\
said the captain, suddenly turning to Alyosha, as though he were going to\
attack him. \'93I am sorry about your finger, sir; but instead of thrashing\
Ilusha, would you like me to chop off my four fingers with this knife here\
before your eyes to satisfy your just wrath? I should think four fingers\
would be enough to satisfy your thirst for vengeance. You won\'92t ask for\
the fifth one too?\'94 He stopped short with a catch in his throat. Every\
feature in his face was twitching and working; he looked extremely\
defiant. He was in a sort of frenzy.\
\
\'93I think I understand it all now,\'94 said Alyosha gently and sorrowfully,\
still keeping his seat. \'93So your boy is a good boy, he loves his father,\
and he attacked me as the brother of your assailant.... Now I understand\
it,\'94 he repeated thoughtfully. \'93But my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch regrets\
his action, I know that, and if only it is possible for him to come to\
you, or better still, to meet you in that same place, he will ask your\
forgiveness before every one\'97if you wish it.\'94\
\
\'93After pulling out my beard, you mean, he will ask my forgiveness? And he\
thinks that will be a satisfactory finish, doesn\'92t he?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no! On the contrary, he will do anything you like and in any way you\
like.\'94\
\
\'93So if I were to ask his highness to go down on his knees before me in\
that very tavern\'97\'91The Metropolis\'92 it\'92s called\'97or in the market\uc0\u8208 place, he\
would do it?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, he would even go down on his knees.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ve pierced me to the heart, sir. Touched me to tears and pierced me\
to the heart! I am only too sensible of your brother\'92s generosity. Allow\
me to introduce my family, my two daughters and my son\'97my litter. If I\
die, who will care for them, and while I live who but they will care for a\
wretch like me? That\'92s a great thing the Lord has ordained for every man\
of my sort, sir. For there must be some one able to love even a man like\
me.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, that\'92s perfectly true!\'94 exclaimed Alyosha.\
\
\'93Oh, do leave off playing the fool! Some idiot comes in, and you put us to\
shame!\'94 cried the girl by the window, suddenly turning to her father with\
a disdainful and contemptuous air.\
\
\'93Wait a little, Varvara!\'94 cried her father, speaking peremptorily but\
looking at her quite approvingly. \'93That\'92s her character,\'94 he said,\
addressing Alyosha again.\
\
\
    \'93And in all nature there was naught\
    That could find favor in his eyes\'97\
\
\
or rather in the feminine: that could find favor in her eyes. But now let\
me present you to my wife, Arina Petrovna. She is crippled, she is forty\uc0\u8208 \
three; she can move, but very little. She is of humble origin. Arina\
Petrovna, compose your countenance. This is Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov.\
Get up, Alexey Fyodorovitch.\'94 He took him by the hand and with unexpected\
force pulled him up. \'93You must stand up to be introduced to a lady. It\'92s\
not the Karamazov, mamma, who ... h\'92m ... etcetera, but his brother,\
radiant with modest virtues. Come, Arina Petrovna, come, mamma, first your\
hand to be kissed.\'94\
\
And he kissed his wife\'92s hand respectfully and even tenderly. The girl at\
the window turned her back indignantly on the scene; an expression of\
extraordinary cordiality came over the haughtily inquiring face of the\
woman.\
\
\'93Good morning! Sit down, Mr. Tchernomazov,\'94 she said.\
\
\'93Karamazov, mamma, Karamazov. We are of humble origin,\'94 he whispered\
again.\
\
\'93Well, Karamazov, or whatever it is, but I always think of\
Tchernomazov.... Sit down. Why has he pulled you up? He calls me crippled,\
but I am not, only my legs are swollen like barrels, and I am shriveled up\
myself. Once I used to be so fat, but now it\'92s as though I had swallowed a\
needle.\'94\
\
\'93We are of humble origin,\'94 the captain muttered again.\
\
\'93Oh, father, father!\'94 the hunchback girl, who had till then been silent on\
her chair, said suddenly, and she hid her eyes in her handkerchief.\
\
\'93Buffoon!\'94 blurted out the girl at the window.\
\
\'93Have you heard our news?\'94 said the mother, pointing at her daughters.\
\'93It\'92s like clouds coming over; the clouds pass and we have music again.\
When we were with the army, we used to have many such guests. I don\'92t mean\
to make any comparisons; every one to their taste. The deacon\'92s wife used\
to come then and say, \'91Alexandr Alexandrovitch is a man of the noblest\
heart, but Nastasya Petrovna,\'92 she would say, \'91is of the brood of hell.\'92\
\'91Well,\'92 I said, \'91that\'92s a matter of taste; but you are a little spitfire.\'92\
\'91And you want keeping in your place,\'92 says she. \'91You black sword,\'92 said I,\
\'91who asked you to teach me?\'92 \'91But my breath,\'92 says she, \'91is clean, and\
yours is unclean.\'92 \'91You ask all the officers whether my breath is\
unclean.\'92 And ever since then I had it in my mind. Not long ago I was\
sitting here as I am now, when I saw that very general come in who came\
here for Easter, and I asked him: \'91Your Excellency,\'92 said I, \'91can a lady\'92s\
breath be unpleasant?\'92 \'91Yes,\'92 he answered; \'91you ought to open a window\uc0\u8208 \
pane or open the door, for the air is not fresh here.\'92 And they all go on\
like that! And what is my breath to them? The dead smell worse still! \'91I\
won\'92t spoil the air,\'92 said I, \'91I\'92ll order some slippers and go away.\'92 My\
darlings, don\'92t blame your own mother! Nikolay Ilyitch, how is it I can\'92t\
please you? There\'92s only Ilusha who comes home from school and loves me.\
Yesterday he brought me an apple. Forgive your own mother\'97forgive a poor\
lonely creature! Why has my breath become unpleasant to you?\'94\
\
And the poor mad woman broke into sobs, and tears streamed down her\
cheeks. The captain rushed up to her.\
\
\'93Mamma, mamma, my dear, give over! You are not lonely. Every one loves\
you, every one adores you.\'94 He began kissing both her hands again and\
tenderly stroking her face; taking the dinner\uc0\u8208 napkin, he began wiping away\
her tears. Alyosha fancied that he too had tears in his eyes. \'93There, you\
see, you hear?\'94 he turned with a sort of fury to Alyosha, pointing to the\
poor imbecile.\
\
\'93I see and hear,\'94 muttered Alyosha.\
\
\'93Father, father, how can you\'97with him! Let him alone!\'94 cried the boy,\
sitting up in his bed and gazing at his father with glowing eyes.\
\
\'93Do give over fooling, showing off your silly antics which never lead to\
anything!\'94 shouted Varvara, stamping her foot with passion.\
\
\'93Your anger is quite just this time, Varvara, and I\'92ll make haste to\
satisfy you. Come, put on your cap, Alexey Fyodorovitch, and I\'92ll put on\
mine. We will go out. I have a word to say to you in earnest, but not\
within these walls. This girl sitting here is my daughter Nina; I forgot\
to introduce her to you. She is a heavenly angel incarnate ... who has\
flown down to us mortals,... if you can understand.\'94\
\
\'93There he is shaking all over, as though he is in convulsions!\'94 Varvara\
went on indignantly.\
\
\'93And she there stamping her foot at me and calling me a fool just now, she\
is a heavenly angel incarnate too, and she has good reason to call me so.\
Come along, Alexey Fyodorovitch, we must make an end.\'94\
\
And, snatching Alyosha\'92s hand, he drew him out of the room into the\
street.\
\
\
\
Chapter VII. And In The Open Air\
\
\
\'93The air is fresh, but in my apartment it is not so in any sense of the\
word. Let us walk slowly, sir. I should be glad of your kind interest.\'94\
\
\'93I too have something important to say to you,\'94 observed Alyosha, \'93only I\
don\'92t know how to begin.\'94\
\
\'93To be sure you must have business with me. You would never have looked in\
upon me without some object. Unless you come simply to complain of the\
boy, and that\'92s hardly likely. And, by the way, about the boy: I could not\
explain to you in there, but here I will describe that scene to you. My\
tow was thicker a week ago\'97I mean my beard. That\'92s the nickname they give\
to my beard, the schoolboys most of all. Well, your brother Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch was pulling me by my beard, I\'92d done nothing, he was in a\
towering rage and happened to come upon me. He dragged me out of the\
tavern into the market\uc0\u8208 place; at that moment the boys were coming out of\
school, and with them Ilusha. As soon as he saw me in such a state he\
rushed up to me. \'91Father,\'92 he cried, \'91father!\'92 He caught hold of me,\
hugged me, tried to pull me away, crying to my assailant, \'91Let go, let go,\
it\'92s my father, forgive him!\'92\'97yes, he actually cried \'91forgive him.\'92 He\
clutched at that hand, that very hand, in his little hands and kissed\
it.... I remember his little face at that moment, I haven\'92t forgotten it\
and I never shall!\'94\
\
\'93I swear,\'94 cried Alyosha, \'93that my brother will express his most deep and\
sincere regret, even if he has to go down on his knees in that same\
market\uc0\u8208 place.... I\'92ll make him or he is no brother of mine!\'94\
\
\'93Aha, then it\'92s only a suggestion! And it does not come from him but\
simply from the generosity of your own warm heart. You should have said\
so. No, in that case allow me to tell you of your brother\'92s highly\
chivalrous soldierly generosity, for he did give expression to it at the\
time. He left off dragging me by my beard and released me: \'91You are an\
officer,\'92 he said, \'91and I am an officer, if you can find a decent man to\
be your second send me your challenge. I will give satisfaction, though\
you are a scoundrel.\'92 That\'92s what he said. A chivalrous spirit indeed! I\
retired with Ilusha, and that scene is a family record imprinted for ever\
on Ilusha\'92s soul. No, it\'92s not for us to claim the privileges of noblemen.\
Judge for yourself. You\'92ve just been in our mansion, what did you see\
there? Three ladies, one a cripple and weak\uc0\u8208 minded, another a cripple and\
hunchback and the third not crippled but far too clever. She is a student,\
dying to get back to Petersburg, to work for the emancipation of the\
Russian woman on the banks of the Neva. I won\'92t speak of Ilusha, he is\
only nine. I am alone in the world, and if I die, what will become of all\
of them? I simply ask you that. And if I challenge him and he kills me on\
the spot, what then? What will become of them? And worse still, if he\
doesn\'92t kill me but only cripples me: I couldn\'92t work, but I should still\
be a mouth to feed. Who would feed it and who would feed them all? Must I\
take Ilusha from school and send him to beg in the streets? That\'92s what it\
means for me to challenge him to a duel. It\'92s silly talk and nothing\
else.\'94\
\
\'93He will beg your forgiveness, he will bow down at your feet in the middle\
of the market\uc0\u8208 place,\'94 cried Alyosha again, with glowing eyes.\
\
\'93I did think of prosecuting him,\'94 the captain went on, \'93but look in our\
code, could I get much compensation for a personal injury? And then\
Agrafena Alexandrovna(3) sent for me and shouted at me: \'91Don\'92t dare to\
dream of it! If you proceed against him, I\'92ll publish it to all the world\
that he beat you for your dishonesty, and then you will be prosecuted.\'92 I\
call God to witness whose was the dishonesty and by whose commands I\
acted, wasn\'92t it by her own and Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s? \'91And what\'92s more,\'92\
she went on, \'91I\'92ll dismiss you for good and you\'92ll never earn another\
penny from me. I\'92ll speak to my merchant too\'92 (that\'92s what she calls her\
old man) \'91and he will dismiss you!\'92 And if he dismisses me, what can I\
earn then from any one? Those two are all I have to look to, for your\
Fyodor Pavlovitch has not only given over employing me, for another\
reason, but he means to make use of papers I\'92ve signed to go to law\
against me. And so I kept quiet, and you have seen our retreat. But now\
let me ask you: did Ilusha hurt your finger much? I didn\'92t like to go into\
it in our mansion before him.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, very much, and he was in a great fury. He was avenging you on me as\
a Karamazov, I see that now. But if only you had seen how he was throwing\
stones at his school\uc0\u8208 fellows! It\'92s very dangerous. They might kill him.\
They are children and stupid. A stone may be thrown and break somebody\'92s\
head.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s just what has happened. He has been bruised by a stone to\uc0\u8208 day. Not\
on the head but on the chest, just above the heart. He came home crying\
and groaning and now he is ill.\'94\
\
\'93And you know he attacks them first. He is bitter against them on your\
account. They say he stabbed a boy called Krassotkin with a pen\uc0\u8208 knife not\
long ago.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve heard about that too, it\'92s dangerous. Krassotkin is an official\
here, we may hear more about it.\'94\
\
\'93I would advise you,\'94 Alyosha went on warmly, \'93not to send him to school\
at all for a time till he is calmer ... and his anger is passed.\'94\
\
\'93Anger!\'94 the captain repeated, \'93that\'92s just what it is. He is a little\
creature, but it\'92s a mighty anger. You don\'92t know all, sir. Let me tell\
you more. Since that incident all the boys have been teasing him about the\
\'91wisp of tow.\'92 Schoolboys are a merciless race, individually they are\
angels, but together, especially in schools, they are often merciless.\
Their teasing has stirred up a gallant spirit in Ilusha. An ordinary boy,\
a weak son, would have submitted, have felt ashamed of his father, sir,\
but he stood up for his father against them all. For his father and for\
truth and justice. For what he suffered when he kissed your brother\'92s hand\
and cried to him \'91Forgive father, forgive him,\'92\'97that only God knows\'97and I,\
his father. For our children\'97not your children, but ours\'97the children of\
the poor gentlemen looked down upon by every one\'97know what justice means,\
sir, even at nine years old. How should the rich know? They don\'92t explore\
such depths once in their lives. But at that moment in the square when he\
kissed his hand, at that moment my Ilusha had grasped all that justice\
means. That truth entered into him and crushed him for ever, sir,\'94 the\
captain said hotly again with a sort of frenzy, and he struck his right\
fist against his left palm as though he wanted to show how \'93the truth\'94\
crushed Ilusha. \'93That very day, sir, he fell ill with fever and was\
delirious all night. All that day he hardly said a word to me, but I\
noticed he kept watching me from the corner, though he turned to the\
window and pretended to be learning his lessons. But I could see his mind\
was not on his lessons. Next day I got drunk to forget my troubles, sinful\
man as I am, and I don\'92t remember much. Mamma began crying, too\'97I am very\
fond of mamma\'97well, I spent my last penny drowning my troubles. Don\'92t\
despise me for that, sir, in Russia men who drink are the best. The best\
men amongst us are the greatest drunkards. I lay down and I don\'92t remember\
about Ilusha, though all that day the boys had been jeering at him at\
school. \'91Wisp of tow,\'92 they shouted, \'91your father was pulled out of the\
tavern by his wisp of tow, you ran by and begged forgiveness.\'92 \'94\
\
\'93On the third day when he came back from school, I saw he looked pale and\
wretched. \'91What is it?\'92 I asked. He wouldn\'92t answer. Well, there\'92s no\
talking in our mansion without mamma and the girls taking part in it.\
What\'92s more, the girls had heard about it the very first day. Varvara had\
begun snarling. \'91You fools and buffoons, can you ever do anything\
rational?\'92 \'91Quite so,\'92 I said, \'91can we ever do anything rational?\'92 For the\
time I turned it off like that. So in the evening I took the boy out for a\
walk, for you must know we go for a walk every evening, always the same\
way, along which we are going now\'97from our gate to that great stone which\
lies alone in the road under the hurdle, which marks the beginning of the\
town pasture. A beautiful and lonely spot, sir. Ilusha and I walked along\
hand in hand as usual. He has a little hand, his fingers are thin and\
cold\'97he suffers with his chest, you know. \'91Father,\'92 said he, \'91father!\'92\
\'91Well?\'92 said I. I saw his eyes flashing. \'91Father, how he treated you\
then!\'92 \'91It can\'92t be helped, Ilusha,\'92 I said. \'91Don\'92t forgive him, father,\
don\'92t forgive him! At school they say that he has paid you ten roubles for\
it.\'92 \'91No, Ilusha,\'92 said I, \'91I would not take money from him for anything.\'92\
Then he began trembling all over, took my hand in both his and kissed it\
again. \'91Father,\'92 he said, \'91father, challenge him to a duel, at school they\
say you are a coward and won\'92t challenge him, and that you\'92ll accept ten\
roubles from him.\'92 \'91I can\'92t challenge him to a duel, Ilusha,\'92 I answered.\
And I told briefly what I\'92ve just told you. He listened. \'91Father,\'92 he\
said, \'91anyway don\'92t forgive it. When I grow up I\'92ll call him out myself\
and kill him.\'92 His eyes shone and glowed. And of course I am his father,\
and I had to put in a word: \'91It\'92s a sin to kill,\'92 I said, \'91even in a\
duel.\'92 \'91Father,\'92 he said, \'91when I grow up, I\'92ll knock him down, knock the\
sword out of his hand, I\'92ll fall on him, wave my sword over him and say:\
\'93I could kill you, but I forgive you, so there!\'94 \'92 You see what the\
workings of his little mind have been during these two days; he must have\
been planning that vengeance all day, and raving about it at night.\
\
\'93But he began to come home from school badly beaten, I found out about it\
the day before yesterday, and you are right, I won\'92t send him to that\
school any more. I heard that he was standing up against all the class\
alone and defying them all, that his heart was full of resentment, of\
bitterness\'97I was alarmed about him. We went for another walk. \'91Father,\'92 he\
asked, \'91are the rich people stronger than any one else on earth?\'92 \'91Yes,\
Ilusha,\'92 I said, \'91there are no people on earth stronger than the rich.\'92\
\'91Father,\'92 he said, \'91I will get rich, I will become an officer and conquer\
everybody. The Tsar will reward me, I will come back here and then no one\
will dare\'97\'92 Then he was silent and his lips still kept trembling.\
\'91Father,\'92 he said, \'91what a horrid town this is.\'92 \'91Yes, Ilusha,\'92 I said,\
\'91it isn\'92t a very nice town.\'92 \'91Father, let us move into another town, a\
nice one,\'92 he said, \'91where people don\'92t know about us.\'92 \'91We will move, we\
will, Ilusha,\'92 said I, \'91only I must save up for it.\'92 I was glad to be able\
to turn his mind from painful thoughts, and we began to dream of how we\
would move to another town, how we would buy a horse and cart. \'91We will\
put mamma and your sisters inside, we will cover them up and we\'92ll walk,\
you shall have a lift now and then, and I\'92ll walk beside, for we must take\
care of our horse, we can\'92t all ride. That\'92s how we\'92ll go.\'92 He was\
enchanted at that, most of all at the thought of having a horse and\
driving him. For of course a Russian boy is born among horses. We\
chattered a long while. Thank God, I thought, I have diverted his mind and\
comforted him.\
\
\'93That was the day before yesterday, in the evening, but last night\
everything was changed. He had gone to school in the morning, he came back\
depressed, terribly depressed. In the evening I took him by the hand and\
we went for a walk; he would not talk. There was a wind blowing and no\
sun, and a feeling of autumn; twilight was coming on. We walked along,\
both of us depressed. \'91Well, my boy,\'92 said I, \'91how about our setting off\
on our travels?\'92 I thought I might bring him back to our talk of the day\
before. He didn\'92t answer, but I felt his fingers trembling in my hand. Ah,\
I thought, it\'92s a bad job; there\'92s something fresh. We had reached the\
stone where we are now. I sat down on the stone. And in the air there were\
lots of kites flapping and whirling. There were as many as thirty in\
sight. Of course, it\'92s just the season for the kites. \'91Look, Ilusha,\'92 said\
I, \'91it\'92s time we got out our last year\'92s kite again. I\'92ll mend it, where\
have you put it away?\'92 My boy made no answer. He looked away and turned\
sideways to me. And then a gust of wind blew up the sand. He suddenly fell\
on me, threw both his little arms round my neck and held me tight. You\
know, when children are silent and proud, and try to keep back their tears\
when they are in great trouble and suddenly break down, their tears fall\
in streams. With those warm streams of tears, he suddenly wetted my face.\
He sobbed and shook as though he were in convulsions, and squeezed up\
against me as I sat on the stone. \'91Father,\'92 he kept crying, \'91dear father,\
how he insulted you!\'92 And I sobbed too. We sat shaking in each other\'92s\
arms. \'91Ilusha,\'92 I said to him, \'91Ilusha darling.\'92 No one saw us then. God\
alone saw us, I hope He will record it to my credit. You must thank your\
brother, Alexey Fyodorovitch. No, sir, I won\'92t thrash my boy for your\
satisfaction.\'94\
\
He had gone back to his original tone of resentful buffoonery. Alyosha\
felt though that he trusted him, and that if there had been some one else\
in his, Alyosha\'92s place, the man would not have spoken so openly and would\
not have told what he had just told. This encouraged Alyosha, whose heart\
was trembling on the verge of tears.\
\
\'93Ah, how I would like to make friends with your boy!\'94 he cried. \'93If you\
could arrange it\'97\'94\
\
\'93Certainly, sir,\'94 muttered the captain.\
\
\'93But now listen to something quite different!\'94 Alyosha went on. \'93I have a\
message for you. That same brother of mine, Dmitri, has insulted his\
betrothed, too, a noble\uc0\u8208 hearted girl of whom you have probably heard. I\
have a right to tell you of her wrong; I ought to do so, in fact, for\
hearing of the insult done to you and learning all about your unfortunate\
position, she commissioned me at once\'97just now\'97to bring you this help from\
her\'97but only from her alone, not from Dmitri, who has abandoned her. Nor\
from me, his brother, nor from any one else, but from her, only from her!\
She entreats you to accept her help.... You have both been insulted by the\
same man. She thought of you only when she had just received a similar\
insult from him\'97similar in its cruelty, I mean. She comes like a sister to\
help a brother in misfortune.... She told me to persuade you to take these\
two hundred roubles from her, as from a sister, knowing that you are in\
such need. No one will know of it, it can give rise to no unjust slander.\
There are the two hundred roubles, and I swear you must take them\
unless\'97unless all men are to be enemies on earth! But there are brothers\
even on earth.... You have a generous heart ... you must see that, you\
must,\'94 and Alyosha held out two new rainbow\uc0\u8208 colored hundred\u8208 rouble notes.\
\
They were both standing at the time by the great stone close to the fence,\
and there was no one near. The notes seemed to produce a tremendous\
impression on the captain. He started, but at first only from\
astonishment. Such an outcome of their conversation was the last thing he\
expected. Nothing could have been farther from his dreams than help from\
any one\'97and such a sum!\
\
He took the notes, and for a minute he was almost unable to answer, quite\
a new expression came into his face.\
\
\'93That for me? So much money\'97two hundred roubles! Good heavens! Why, I\
haven\'92t seen so much money for the last four years! Mercy on us! And she\
says she is a sister.... And is that the truth?\'94\
\
\'93I swear that all I told you is the truth,\'94 cried Alyosha.\
\
The captain flushed red.\
\
\'93Listen, my dear, listen. If I take it, I shan\'92t be behaving like a\
scoundrel? In your eyes, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I shan\'92t be a scoundrel? No,\
Alexey Fyodorovitch, listen, listen,\'94 he hurried, touching Alyosha with\
both his hands. \'93You are persuading me to take it, saying that it\'92s a\
sister sends it, but inwardly, in your heart won\'92t you feel contempt for\
me if I take it, eh?\'94\
\
\'93No, no, on my salvation I swear I shan\'92t! And no one will ever know but\
me\'97I, you and she, and one other lady, her great friend.\'94\
\
\'93Never mind the lady! Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch, at a moment like this\
you must listen, for you can\'92t understand what these two hundred roubles\
mean to me now.\'94 The poor fellow went on rising gradually into a sort of\
incoherent, almost wild enthusiasm. He was thrown off his balance and\
talked extremely fast, as though afraid he would not be allowed to say all\
he had to say.\
\
\'93Besides its being honestly acquired from a \'91sister,\'92 so highly respected\
and revered, do you know that now I can look after mamma and Nina, my\
hunchback angel daughter? Doctor Herzenstube came to me in the kindness of\
his heart and was examining them both for a whole hour. \'91I can make\
nothing of it,\'92 said he, but he prescribed a mineral water which is kept\
at a chemist\'92s here. He said it would be sure to do her good, and he\
ordered baths, too, with some medicine in them. The mineral water costs\
thirty copecks, and she\'92d need to drink forty bottles perhaps; so I took\
the prescription and laid it on the shelf under the ikons, and there it\
lies. And he ordered hot baths for Nina with something dissolved in them,\
morning and evening. But how can we carry out such a cure in our mansion,\
without servants, without help, without a bath, and without water? Nina is\
rheumatic all over, I don\'92t think I told you that. All her right side\
aches at night, she is in agony, and, would you believe it, the angel\
bears it without groaning for fear of waking us. We eat what we can get,\
and she\'92ll only take the leavings, what you\'92d scarcely give to a dog. \'91I\
am not worth it, I am taking it from you, I am a burden on you,\'92 that\'92s\
what her angel eyes try to express. We wait on her, but she doesn\'92t like\
it. \'91I am a useless cripple, no good to any one.\'92 As though she were not\
worth it, when she is the saving of all of us with her angelic sweetness.\
Without her, without her gentle word it would be hell among us! She\
softens even Varvara. And don\'92t judge Varvara harshly either, she is an\
angel too, she, too, has suffered wrong. She came to us for the summer,\
and she brought sixteen roubles she had earned by lessons and saved up, to\
go back with to Petersburg in September, that is now. But we took her\
money and lived on it, so now she has nothing to go back with. Though\
indeed she couldn\'92t go back, for she has to work for us like a slave. She\
is like an overdriven horse with all of us on her back. She waits on us\
all, mends and washes, sweeps the floor, puts mamma to bed. And mamma is\
capricious and tearful and insane! And now I can get a servant with this\
money, you understand, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I can get medicines for the\
dear creatures, I can send my student to Petersburg, I can buy beef, I can\
feed them properly. Good Lord, but it\'92s a dream!\'94\
\
Alyosha was delighted that he had brought him such happiness and that the\
poor fellow had consented to be made happy.\
\
\'93Stay, Alexey Fyodorovitch, stay,\'94 the captain began to talk with frenzied\
rapidity, carried away by a new day\uc0\u8208 dream. \'93Do you know that Ilusha and I\
will perhaps really carry out our dream. We will buy a horse and cart, a\
black horse, he insists on its being black, and we will set off as we\
pretended the other day. I have an old friend, a lawyer in K. province,\
and I heard through a trustworthy man that if I were to go he\'92d give me a\
place as clerk in his office, so, who knows, maybe he would. So I\'92d just\
put mamma and Nina in the cart, and Ilusha could drive, and I\'92d walk, I\'92d\
walk.... Why, if I only succeed in getting one debt paid that\'92s owing me,\
I should have perhaps enough for that too!\'94\
\
\'93There would be enough!\'94 cried Alyosha. \'93Katerina Ivanovna will send you\
as much more as you need, and you know, I have money too, take what you\
want, as you would from a brother, from a friend, you can give it back\
later.... (You\'92ll get rich, you\'92ll get rich!) And you know you couldn\'92t\
have a better idea than to move to another province! It would be the\
saving of you, especially of your boy\'97and you ought to go quickly, before\
the winter, before the cold. You must write to us when you are there, and\
we will always be brothers.... No, it\'92s not a dream!\'94\
\
Alyosha could have hugged him, he was so pleased. But glancing at him he\
stopped short. The man was standing with his neck outstretched and his\
lips protruding, with a pale and frenzied face. His lips were moving as\
though trying to articulate something; no sound came, but still his lips\
moved. It was uncanny.\
\
\'93What is it?\'94 asked Alyosha, startled.\
\
\'93Alexey Fyodorovitch ... I ... you,\'94 muttered the captain, faltering,\
looking at him with a strange, wild, fixed stare, and an air of desperate\
resolution. At the same time there was a sort of grin on his lips. \'93I ...\
you, sir ... wouldn\'92t you like me to show you a little trick I know?\'94 he\
murmured, suddenly, in a firm rapid whisper, his voice no longer\
faltering.\
\
\'93What trick?\'94\
\
\'93A pretty trick,\'94 whispered the captain. His mouth was twisted on the left\
side, his left eye was screwed up. He still stared at Alyosha.\
\
\'93What is the matter? What trick?\'94 Alyosha cried, now thoroughly alarmed.\
\
\'93Why, look,\'94 squealed the captain suddenly, and showing him the two notes\
which he had been holding by one corner between his thumb and forefinger\
during the conversation, he crumpled them up savagely and squeezed them\
tight in his right hand. \'93Do you see, do you see?\'94 he shrieked, pale and\
infuriated. And suddenly flinging up his hand, he threw the crumpled notes\
on the sand. \'93Do you see?\'94 he shrieked again, pointing to them. \'93Look\
there!\'94\
\
And with wild fury he began trampling them under his heel, gasping and\
exclaiming as he did so:\
\
\'93So much for your money! So much for your money! So much for your money!\
So much for your money!\'94\
\
Suddenly he darted back and drew himself up before Alyosha, and his whole\
figure expressed unutterable pride.\
\
\'93Tell those who sent you that the wisp of tow does not sell his honor,\'94 he\
cried, raising his arm in the air. Then he turned quickly and began to\
run; but he had not run five steps before he turned completely round and\
kissed his hand to Alyosha. He ran another five paces and then turned\
round for the last time. This time his face was not contorted with\
laughter, but quivering all over with tears. In a tearful, faltering,\
sobbing voice he cried:\
\
\'93What should I say to my boy if I took money from you for our shame?\'94\
\
And then he ran on without turning. Alyosha looked after him,\
inexpressibly grieved. Oh, he saw that till the very last moment the man\
had not known he would crumple up and fling away the notes. He did not\
turn back. Alyosha knew he would not. He would not follow him and call him\
back, he knew why. When he was out of sight, Alyosha picked up the two\
notes. They were very much crushed and crumpled, and had been pressed into\
the sand, but were uninjured and even rustled like new ones when Alyosha\
unfolded them and smoothed them out. After smoothing them out, he folded\
them up, put them in his pocket and went to Katerina Ivanovna to report on\
the success of her commission.\
\
\
\
\
Book V. Pro And Contra\
\
\
\
Chapter I. The Engagement\
\
\
Madame Hohlakov was again the first to meet Alyosha. She was flustered;\
something important had happened. Katerina Ivanovna\'92s hysterics had ended\
in a fainting fit, and then \'93a terrible, awful weakness had followed, she\
lay with her eyes turned up and was delirious. Now she was in a fever.\
They had sent for Herzenstube; they had sent for the aunts. The aunts were\
already here, but Herzenstube had not yet come. They were all sitting in\
her room, waiting. She was unconscious now, and what if it turned to brain\
fever!\'94\
\
Madame Hohlakov looked gravely alarmed. \'93This is serious, serious,\'94 she\
added at every word, as though nothing that had happened to her before had\
been serious. Alyosha listened with distress, and was beginning to\
describe his adventures, but she interrupted him at the first words. She\
had not time to listen. She begged him to sit with Lise and wait for her\
there.\
\
\'93Lise,\'94 she whispered almost in his ear, \'93Lise has greatly surprised me\
just now, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch. She touched me, too, and so my heart\
forgives her everything. Only fancy, as soon as you had gone, she began to\
be truly remorseful for having laughed at you to\uc0\u8208 day and yesterday, though\
she was not laughing at you, but only joking. But she was seriously sorry\
for it, almost ready to cry, so that I was quite surprised. She has never\
been really sorry for laughing at me, but has only made a joke of it. And\
you know she is laughing at me every minute. But this time she was in\
earnest. She thinks a great deal of your opinion, Alexey Fyodorovitch, and\
don\'92t take offense or be wounded by her if you can help it. I am never\
hard upon her, for she\'92s such a clever little thing. Would you believe it?\
She said just now that you were a friend of her childhood, \'91the greatest\
friend of her childhood\'92\'97just think of that\'97\'91greatest friend\'92\'97and what\
about me? She has very strong feelings and memories, and, what\'92s more, she\
uses these phrases, most unexpected words, which come out all of a sudden\
when you least expect them. She spoke lately about a pine\uc0\u8208 tree, for\
instance: there used to be a pine\uc0\u8208 tree standing in our garden in her early\
childhood. Very likely it\'92s standing there still; so there\'92s no need to\
speak in the past tense. Pine\uc0\u8208 trees are not like people, Alexey\
Fyodorovitch, they don\'92t change quickly. \'91Mamma,\'92 she said, \'91I remember\
this pine\uc0\u8208 tree as in a dream,\'92 only she said something so original about\
it that I can\'92t repeat it. Besides, I\'92ve forgotten it. Well, good\uc0\u8208 by! I am\
so worried I feel I shall go out of my mind. Ah! Alexey Fyodorovitch, I\'92ve\
been out of my mind twice in my life. Go to Lise, cheer her up, as you\
always can so charmingly. Lise,\'94 she cried, going to her door, \'93here I\'92ve\
brought you Alexey Fyodorovitch, whom you insulted so. He is not at all\
angry, I assure you; on the contrary, he is surprised that you could\
suppose so.\'94\
\
\'93_Merci, maman._ Come in, Alexey Fyodorovitch.\'94\
\
Alyosha went in. Lise looked rather embarrassed, and at once flushed\
crimson. She was evidently ashamed of something, and, as people always do\
in such cases, she began immediately talking of other things, as though\
they were of absorbing interest to her at the moment.\
\
\'93Mamma has just told me all about the two hundred roubles, Alexey\
Fyodorovitch, and your taking them to that poor officer ... and she told\
me all the awful story of how he had been insulted ... and you know,\
although mamma muddles things ... she always rushes from one thing to\
another ... I cried when I heard. Well, did you give him the money and how\
is that poor man getting on?\'94\
\
\'93The fact is I didn\'92t give it to him, and it\'92s a long story,\'94 answered\
Alyosha, as though he, too, could think of nothing but his regret at\
having failed, yet Lise saw perfectly well that he, too, looked away, and\
that he, too, was trying to talk of other things.\
\
Alyosha sat down to the table and began to tell his story, but at the\
first words he lost his embarrassment and gained the whole of Lise\'92s\
attention as well. He spoke with deep feeling, under the influence of the\
strong impression he had just received, and he succeeded in telling his\
story well and circumstantially. In old days in Moscow he had been fond of\
coming to Lise and describing to her what had just happened to him, what\
he had read, or what he remembered of his childhood. Sometimes they had\
made day\uc0\u8208 dreams and woven whole romances together\'97generally cheerful and\
amusing ones. Now they both felt suddenly transported to the old days in\
Moscow, two years before. Lise was extremely touched by his story. Alyosha\
described Ilusha with warm feeling. When he finished describing how the\
luckless man trampled on the money, Lise could not help clasping her hands\
and crying out:\
\
\'93So you didn\'92t give him the money! So you let him run away! Oh, dear, you\
ought to have run after him!\'94\
\
\'93No, Lise; it\'92s better I didn\'92t run after him,\'94 said Alyosha, getting up\
from his chair and walking thoughtfully across the room.\
\
\'93How so? How is it better? Now they are without food and their case is\
hopeless?\'94\
\
\'93Not hopeless, for the two hundred roubles will still come to them. He\'92ll\
take the money to\uc0\u8208 morrow. To\u8208 morrow he will be sure to take it,\'94 said\
Alyosha, pacing up and down, pondering. \'93You see, Lise,\'94 he went on,\
stopping suddenly before her, \'93I made one blunder, but that, even that, is\
all for the best.\'94\
\
\'93What blunder, and why is it for the best?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll tell you. He is a man of weak and timorous character; he has\
suffered so much and is very good\uc0\u8208 natured. I keep wondering why he took\
offense so suddenly, for I assure you, up to the last minute, he did not\
know that he was going to trample on the notes. And I think now that there\
was a great deal to offend him ... and it could not have been otherwise in\
his position.... To begin with, he was sore at having been so glad of the\
money in my presence and not having concealed it from me. If he had been\
pleased, but not so much; if he had not shown it; if he had begun\
affecting scruples and difficulties, as other people do when they take\
money, he might still endure to take it. But he was too genuinely\
delighted, and that was mortifying. Ah, Lise, he is a good and truthful\
man\'97that\'92s the worst of the whole business. All the while he talked, his\
voice was so weak, so broken, he talked so fast, so fast, he kept laughing\
such a laugh, or perhaps he was crying\'97yes, I am sure he was crying, he\
was so delighted\'97and he talked about his daughters\'97and about the situation\
he could get in another town.... And when he had poured out his heart, he\
felt ashamed at having shown me his inmost soul like that. So he began to\
hate me at once. He is one of those awfully sensitive poor people. What\
had made him feel most ashamed was that he had given in too soon and\
accepted me as a friend, you see. At first he almost flew at me and tried\
to intimidate me, but as soon as he saw the money he had begun embracing\
me; he kept touching me with his hands. This must have been how he came to\
feel it all so humiliating, and then I made that blunder, a very important\
one. I suddenly said to him that if he had not money enough to move to\
another town, we would give it to him, and, indeed, I myself would give\
him as much as he wanted out of my own money. That struck him all at once.\
Why, he thought, did I put myself forward to help him? You know, Lise,\
it\'92s awfully hard for a man who has been injured, when other people look\
at him as though they were his benefactors.... I\'92ve heard that; Father\
Zossima told me so. I don\'92t know how to put it, but I have often seen it\
myself. And I feel like that myself, too. And the worst of it was that\
though he did not know, up to the very last minute, that he would trample\
on the notes, he had a kind of presentiment of it, I am sure of that.\
That\'92s just what made him so ecstatic, that he had that presentiment....\
And though it\'92s so dreadful, it\'92s all for the best. In fact, I believe\
nothing better could have happened.\'94\
\
\'93Why, why could nothing better have happened?\'94 cried Lise, looking with\
great surprise at Alyosha.\
\
\'93Because if he had taken the money, in an hour after getting home, he\
would be crying with mortification, that\'92s just what would have happened.\
And most likely he would have come to me early to\uc0\u8208 morrow, and perhaps have\
flung the notes at me and trampled upon them as he did just now. But now\
he has gone home awfully proud and triumphant, though he knows he has\
\'91ruined himself.\'92 So now nothing could be easier than to make him accept\
the two hundred roubles by to\uc0\u8208 morrow, for he has already vindicated his\
honor, tossed away the money, and trampled it under foot.... He couldn\'92t\
know when he did it that I should bring it to him again to\uc0\u8208 morrow, and yet\
he is in terrible need of that money. Though he is proud of himself now,\
yet even to\uc0\u8208 day he\'92ll be thinking what a help he has lost. He will think\
of it more than ever at night, will dream of it, and by to\uc0\u8208 morrow morning\
he may be ready to run to me to ask forgiveness. It\'92s just then that I\'92ll\
appear. \'91Here, you are a proud man,\'92 I shall say: \'91you have shown it; but\
now take the money and forgive us!\'92 And then he will take it!\'94\
\
Alyosha was carried away with joy as he uttered his last words, \'93And then\
he will take it!\'94 Lise clapped her hands.\
\
\'93Ah, that\'92s true! I understand that perfectly now. Ah, Alyosha, how do you\
know all this? So young and yet he knows what\'92s in the heart.... I should\
never have worked it out.\'94\
\
\'93The great thing now is to persuade him that he is on an equal footing\
with us, in spite of his taking money from us,\'94 Alyosha went on in his\
excitement, \'93and not only on an equal, but even on a higher footing.\'94\
\
\'93 \'91On a higher footing\'92 is charming, Alexey Fyodorovitch; but go on, go\
on!\'94\
\
\'93You mean there isn\'92t such an expression as \'91on a higher footing\'92; but\
that doesn\'92t matter because\'97\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no, of course it doesn\'92t matter. Forgive me, Alyosha, dear.... You\
know, I scarcely respected you till now\'97that is I respected you but on an\
equal footing; but now I shall begin to respect you on a higher footing.\
Don\'92t be angry, dear, at my joking,\'94 she put in at once, with strong\
feeling. \'93I am absurd and small, but you, you! Listen, Alexey\
Fyodorovitch. Isn\'92t there in all our analysis\'97I mean your analysis ... no,\
better call it ours\'97aren\'92t we showing contempt for him, for that poor\
man\'97in analyzing his soul like this, as it were, from above, eh? In\
deciding so certainly that he will take the money?\'94\
\
\'93No, Lise, it\'92s not contempt,\'94 Alyosha answered, as though he had prepared\
himself for the question. \'93I was thinking of that on the way here. How can\
it be contempt when we are all like him, when we are all just the same as\
he is? For you know we are just the same, no better. If we are better, we\
should have been just the same in his place.... I don\'92t know about you,\
Lise, but I consider that I have a sordid soul in many ways, and his soul\
is not sordid; on the contrary, full of fine feeling.... No, Lise, I have\
no contempt for him. Do you know, Lise, my elder told me once to care for\
most people exactly as one would for children, and for some of them as one\
would for the sick in hospitals.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, Alexey Fyodorovitch, dear, let us care for people as we would for the\
sick!\'94\
\
\'93Let us, Lise; I am ready. Though I am not altogether ready in myself. I\
am sometimes very impatient and at other times I don\'92t see things. It\'92s\
different with you.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, I don\'92t believe it! Alexey Fyodorovitch, how happy I am!\'94\
\
\'93I am so glad you say so, Lise.\'94\
\
\'93Alexey Fyodorovitch, you are wonderfully good, but you are sometimes sort\
of formal.... And yet you are not a bit formal really. Go to the door,\
open it gently, and see whether mamma is listening,\'94 said Lise, in a\
nervous, hurried whisper.\
\
Alyosha went, opened the door, and reported that no one was listening.\
\
\'93Come here, Alexey Fyodorovitch,\'94 Lise went on, flushing redder and\
redder. \'93Give me your hand\'97that\'92s right. I have to make a great\
confession, I didn\'92t write to you yesterday in joke, but in earnest,\'94 and\
she hid her eyes with her hand. It was evident that she was greatly\
ashamed of the confession.\
\
Suddenly she snatched his hand and impulsively kissed it three times.\
\
\'93Ah, Lise, what a good thing!\'94 cried Alyosha joyfully. \'93You know, I was\
perfectly sure you were in earnest.\'94\
\
\'93Sure? Upon my word!\'94 She put aside his hand, but did not leave go of it,\
blushing hotly, and laughing a little happy laugh. \'93I kiss his hand and he\
says, \'91What a good thing!\'92 \'94\
\
But her reproach was undeserved. Alyosha, too, was greatly overcome.\
\
\'93I should like to please you always, Lise, but I don\'92t know how to do it,\'94\
he muttered, blushing too.\
\
\'93Alyosha, dear, you are cold and rude. Do you see? He has chosen me as his\
wife and is quite settled about it. He is sure I was in earnest. What a\
thing to say! Why, that\'92s impertinence\'97that\'92s what it is.\'94\
\
\'93Why, was it wrong of me to feel sure?\'94 Alyosha asked, laughing suddenly.\
\
\'93Ah, Alyosha, on the contrary, it was delightfully right,\'94 cried Lise,\
looking tenderly and happily at him.\
\
Alyosha stood still, holding her hand in his. Suddenly he stooped down and\
kissed her on her lips.\
\
\'93Oh, what are you doing?\'94 cried Lise. Alyosha was terribly abashed.\
\
\'93Oh, forgive me if I shouldn\'92t.... Perhaps I\'92m awfully stupid.... You said\
I was cold, so I kissed you.... But I see it was stupid.\'94\
\
Lise laughed, and hid her face in her hands. \'93And in that dress!\'94 she\
ejaculated in the midst of her mirth. But she suddenly ceased laughing and\
became serious, almost stern.\
\
\'93Alyosha, we must put off kissing. We are not ready for that yet, and we\
shall have a long time to wait,\'94 she ended suddenly. \'93Tell me rather why\
you who are so clever, so intellectual, so observant, choose a little\
idiot, an invalid like me? Ah, Alyosha, I am awfully happy, for I don\'92t\
deserve you a bit.\'94\
\
\'93You do, Lise. I shall be leaving the monastery altogether in a few days.\
If I go into the world, I must marry. I know that. _He_ told me to marry,\
too. Whom could I marry better than you\'97and who would have me except you?\
I have been thinking it over. In the first place, you\'92ve known me from a\
child and you\'92ve a great many qualities I haven\'92t. You are more light\uc0\u8208 \
hearted than I am; above all, you are more innocent than I am. I have been\
brought into contact with many, many things already.... Ah, you don\'92t\
know, but I, too, am a Karamazov. What does it matter if you do laugh and\
make jokes, and at me, too? Go on laughing. I am so glad you do. You laugh\
like a little child, but you think like a martyr.\'94\
\
\'93Like a martyr? How?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, Lise, your question just now: whether we weren\'92t showing contempt\
for that poor man by dissecting his soul\'97that was the question of a\
sufferer.... You see, I don\'92t know how to express it, but any one who\
thinks of such questions is capable of suffering. Sitting in your invalid\
chair you must have thought over many things already.\'94\
\
\'93Alyosha, give me your hand. Why are you taking it away?\'94 murmured Lise in\
a failing voice, weak with happiness. \'93Listen, Alyosha. What will you wear\
when you come out of the monastery? What sort of suit? Don\'92t laugh, don\'92t\
be angry, it\'92s very, very important to me.\'94\
\
\'93I haven\'92t thought about the suit, Lise; but I\'92ll wear whatever you like.\'94\
\
\'93I should like you to have a dark blue velvet coat, a white piqu\'e9\
waistcoat, and a soft gray felt hat.... Tell me, did you believe that I\
didn\'92t care for you when I said I didn\'92t mean what I wrote?\'94\
\
\'93No, I didn\'92t believe it.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, you insupportable person, you are incorrigible.\'94\
\
\'93You see, I knew that you\'97seemed to care for me, but I pretended to\
believe that you didn\'92t care for me to make it\'97easier for you.\'94\
\
\'93That makes it worse! Worse and better than all! Alyosha, I am awfully\
fond of you. Just before you came this morning, I tried my fortune. I\
decided I would ask you for my letter, and if you brought it out calmly\
and gave it to me (as might have been expected from you) it would mean\
that you did not love me at all, that you felt nothing, and were simply a\
stupid boy, good for nothing, and that I am ruined. But you left the\
letter at home and that cheered me. You left it behind on purpose, so as\
not to give it back, because you knew I would ask for it? That was it,\
wasn\'92t it?\'94\
\
\'93Ah, Lise, it was not so a bit. The letter is with me now, and it was this\
morning, in this pocket. Here it is.\'94\
\
Alyosha pulled the letter out laughing, and showed it her at a distance.\
\
\'93But I am not going to give it to you. Look at it from here.\'94\
\
\'93Why, then you told a lie? You, a monk, told a lie!\'94\
\
\'93I told a lie if you like,\'94 Alyosha laughed, too. \'93I told a lie so as not\
to give you back the letter. It\'92s very precious to me,\'94 he added suddenly,\
with strong feeling, and again he flushed. \'93It always will be, and I won\'92t\
give it up to any one!\'94\
\
Lise looked at him joyfully. \'93Alyosha,\'94 she murmured again, \'93look at the\
door. Isn\'92t mamma listening?\'94\
\
\'93Very well, Lise, I\'92ll look; but wouldn\'92t it be better not to look? Why\
suspect your mother of such meanness?\'94\
\
\'93What meanness? As for her spying on her daughter, it\'92s her right, it\'92s\
not meanness!\'94 cried Lise, firing up. \'93You may be sure, Alexey\
Fyodorovitch, that when I am a mother, if I have a daughter like myself I\
shall certainly spy on her!\'94\
\
\'93Really, Lise? That\'92s not right.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, my goodness! What has meanness to do with it? If she were listening\
to some ordinary worldly conversation, it would be meanness, but when her\
own daughter is shut up with a young man.... Listen, Alyosha, do you know\
I shall spy upon you as soon as we are married, and let me tell you I\
shall open all your letters and read them, so you may as well be\
prepared.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, of course, if so\'97\'94 muttered Alyosha, \'93only it\'92s not right.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, how contemptuous! Alyosha, dear, we won\'92t quarrel the very first day.\
I\'92d better tell you the whole truth. Of course, it\'92s very wrong to spy on\
people, and, of course, I am not right and you are, only I shall spy on\
you all the same.\'94\
\
\'93Do, then; you won\'92t find out anything,\'94 laughed Alyosha.\
\
\'93And, Alyosha, will you give in to me? We must decide that too.\'94\
\
\'93I shall be delighted to, Lise, and certain to, only not in the most\
important things. Even if you don\'92t agree with me, I shall do my duty in\
the most important things.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s right; but let me tell you I am ready to give in to you not only\
in the most important matters, but in everything. And I am ready to vow to\
do so now\'97in everything, and for all my life!\'94 cried Lise fervently, \'93and\
I\'92ll do it gladly, gladly! What\'92s more, I\'92ll swear never to spy on you,\
never once, never to read one of your letters. For you are right and I am\
not. And though I shall be awfully tempted to spy, I know that I won\'92t do\
it since you consider it dishonorable. You are my conscience now....\
Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch, why have you been so sad lately\'97both\
yesterday and to\uc0\u8208 day? I know you have a lot of anxiety and trouble, but I\
see you have some special grief besides, some secret one, perhaps?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, Lise, I have a secret one, too,\'94 answered Alyosha mournfully. \'93I see\
you love me, since you guessed that.\'94\
\
\'93What grief? What about? Can you tell me?\'94 asked Lise with timid entreaty.\
\
\'93I\'92ll tell you later, Lise\'97afterwards,\'94 said Alyosha, confused. \'93Now you\
wouldn\'92t understand it perhaps\'97and perhaps I couldn\'92t explain it.\'94\
\
\'93I know your brothers and your father are worrying you, too.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, my brothers too,\'94 murmured Alyosha, pondering.\
\
\'93I don\'92t like your brother Ivan, Alyosha,\'94 said Lise suddenly.\
\
He noticed this remark with some surprise, but did not answer it.\
\
\'93My brothers are destroying themselves,\'94 he went on, \'93my father, too. And\
they are destroying others with them. It\'92s \'91the primitive force of the\
Karamazovs,\'92 as Father Pa\'efssy said the other day, a crude, unbridled,\
earthly force. Does the spirit of God move above that force? Even that I\
don\'92t know. I only know that I, too, am a Karamazov.... Me a monk, a monk!\
Am I a monk, Lise? You said just now that I was.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I did.\'94\
\
\'93And perhaps I don\'92t even believe in God.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t believe? What is the matter?\'94 said Lise quietly and gently. But\
Alyosha did not answer. There was something too mysterious, too subjective\
in these last words of his, perhaps obscure to himself, but yet torturing\
him.\
\
\'93And now on the top of it all, my friend, the best man in the world, is\
going, is leaving the earth! If you knew, Lise, how bound up in soul I am\
with him! And then I shall be left alone.... I shall come to you, Lise....\
For the future we will be together.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, together, together! Henceforward we shall be always together, all\
our lives! Listen, kiss me, I allow you.\'94\
\
Alyosha kissed her.\
\
\'93Come, now go. Christ be with you!\'94 and she made the sign of the cross\
over him. \'93Make haste back to _him_ while he is alive. I see I\'92ve kept you\
cruelly. I\'92ll pray to\uc0\u8208 day for him and you. Alyosha, we shall be happy!\
Shall we be happy, shall we?\'94\
\
\'93I believe we shall, Lise.\'94\
\
Alyosha thought it better not to go in to Madame Hohlakov and was going\
out of the house without saying good\uc0\u8208 by to her. But no sooner had he\
opened the door than he found Madame Hohlakov standing before him. From\
the first word Alyosha guessed that she had been waiting on purpose to\
meet him.\
\
\'93Alexey Fyodorovitch, this is awful. This is all childish nonsense and\
ridiculous. I trust you won\'92t dream\'97It\'92s foolishness, nothing but\
foolishness!\'94 she said, attacking him at once.\
\
\'93Only don\'92t tell her that,\'94 said Alyosha, \'93or she will be upset, and\
that\'92s bad for her now.\'94\
\
\'93Sensible advice from a sensible young man. Am I to understand that you\
only agreed with her from compassion for her invalid state, because you\
didn\'92t want to irritate her by contradiction?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no, not at all. I was quite serious in what I said,\'94 Alyosha declared\
stoutly.\
\
\'93To be serious about it is impossible, unthinkable, and in the first place\
I shall never be at home to you again, and I shall take her away, you may\
be sure of that.\'94\
\
\'93But why?\'94 asked Alyosha. \'93It\'92s all so far off. We may have to wait\
another year and a half.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, Alexey Fyodorovitch, that\'92s true, of course, and you\'92ll have time to\
quarrel and separate a thousand times in a year and a half. But I am so\
unhappy! Though it\'92s such nonsense, it\'92s a great blow to me. I feel like\
Famusov in the last scene of _Sorrow from Wit_. You are Tchatsky and she\
is Sofya, and, only fancy, I\'92ve run down to meet you on the stairs, and in\
the play the fatal scene takes place on the staircase. I heard it all; I\
almost dropped. So this is the explanation of her dreadful night and her\
hysterics of late! It means love to the daughter but death to the mother.\
I might as well be in my grave at once. And a more serious matter still,\
what is this letter she has written? Show it me at once, at once!\'94\
\
\'93No, there\'92s no need. Tell me, how is Katerina Ivanovna now? I must know.\'94\
\
\'93She still lies in delirium; she has not regained consciousness. Her aunts\
are here; but they do nothing but sigh and give themselves airs.\
Herzenstube came, and he was so alarmed that I didn\'92t know what to do for\
him. I nearly sent for a doctor to look after him. He was driven home in\
my carriage. And on the top of it all, you and this letter! It\'92s true\
nothing can happen for a year and a half. In the name of all that\'92s holy,\
in the name of your dying elder, show me that letter, Alexey Fyodorovitch.\
I\'92m her mother. Hold it in your hand, if you like, and I will read it so.\'94\
\
\'93No, I won\'92t show it to you. Even if she sanctioned it, I wouldn\'92t. I am\
coming to\uc0\u8208 morrow, and if you like, we can talk over many things, but now\
good\uc0\u8208 by!\'94\
\
And Alyosha ran downstairs and into the street.\
\
\
\
Chapter II. Smerdyakov With A Guitar\
\
\
He had no time to lose indeed. Even while he was saying good\uc0\u8208 by to Lise,\
the thought had struck him that he must attempt some stratagem to find his\
brother Dmitri, who was evidently keeping out of his way. It was getting\
late, nearly three o\'92clock. Alyosha\'92s whole soul turned to the monastery,\
to his dying saint, but the necessity of seeing Dmitri outweighed\
everything. The conviction that a great inevitable catastrophe was about\
to happen grew stronger in Alyosha\'92s mind with every hour. What that\
catastrophe was, and what he would say at that moment to his brother, he\
could perhaps not have said definitely. \'93Even if my benefactor must die\
without me, anyway I won\'92t have to reproach myself all my life with the\
thought that I might have saved something and did not, but passed by and\
hastened home. If I do as I intend, I shall be following his great\
precept.\'94\
\
His plan was to catch his brother Dmitri unawares, to climb over the\
fence, as he had the day before, get into the garden and sit in the\
summer\uc0\u8208 house. If Dmitri were not there, thought Alyosha, he would not\
announce himself to Foma or the women of the house, but would remain\
hidden in the summer\uc0\u8208 house, even if he had to wait there till evening. If,\
as before, Dmitri were lying in wait for Grushenka to come, he would be\
very likely to come to the summer\uc0\u8208 house. Alyosha did not, however, give\
much thought to the details of his plan, but resolved to act upon it, even\
if it meant not getting back to the monastery that day.\
\
Everything happened without hindrance, he climbed over the hurdle almost\
in the same spot as the day before, and stole into the summer\uc0\u8208 house\
unseen. He did not want to be noticed. The woman of the house and Foma\
too, if he were here, might be loyal to his brother and obey his\
instructions, and so refuse to let Alyosha come into the garden, or might\
warn Dmitri that he was being sought and inquired for.\
\
There was no one in the summer\uc0\u8208 house. Alyosha sat down and began to wait.\
He looked round the summer\uc0\u8208 house, which somehow struck him as a great deal\
more ancient than before. Though the day was just as fine as yesterday, it\
seemed a wretched little place this time. There was a circle on the table,\
left no doubt from the glass of brandy having been spilt the day before.\
Foolish and irrelevant ideas strayed about his mind, as they always do in\
a time of tedious waiting. He wondered, for instance, why he had sat down\
precisely in the same place as before, why not in the other seat. At last\
he felt very depressed\'97depressed by suspense and uncertainty. But he had\
not sat there more than a quarter of an hour, when he suddenly heard the\
thrum of a guitar somewhere quite close. People were sitting, or had only\
just sat down, somewhere in the bushes not more than twenty paces away.\
Alyosha suddenly recollected that on coming out of the summer\uc0\u8208 house the\
day before, he had caught a glimpse of an old green low garden\uc0\u8208 seat among\
the bushes on the left, by the fence. The people must be sitting on it\
now. Who were they?\
\
A man\'92s voice suddenly began singing in a sugary falsetto, accompanying\
himself on the guitar:\
\
\
    With invincible force\
    I am bound to my dear.\
    O Lord, have mercy\
    On her and on me!\
    On her and on me!\
    On her and on me!\
\
\
The voice ceased. It was a lackey\'92s tenor and a lackey\'92s song. Another\
voice, a woman\'92s, suddenly asked insinuatingly and bashfully, though with\
mincing affectation:\
\
\'93Why haven\'92t you been to see us for so long, Pavel Fyodorovitch? Why do\
you always look down upon us?\'94\
\
\'93Not at all,\'94 answered a man\'92s voice politely, but with emphatic dignity.\
It was clear that the man had the best of the position, and that the woman\
was making advances. \'93I believe the man must be Smerdyakov,\'94 thought\
Alyosha, \'93from his voice. And the lady must be the daughter of the house\
here, who has come from Moscow, the one who wears the dress with a tail\
and goes to Marfa for soup.\'94\
\
\'93I am awfully fond of verses of all kinds, if they rhyme,\'94 the woman\'92s\
voice continued. \'93Why don\'92t you go on?\'94\
\
The man sang again:\
\
\
    What do I care for royal wealth\
    If but my dear one be in health?\
    Lord have mercy\
    On her and on me!\
    On her and on me!\
    On her and on me!\
\
\
\'93It was even better last time,\'94 observed the woman\'92s voice. \'93You sang \'91If\
my darling be in health\'92; it sounded more tender. I suppose you\'92ve\
forgotten to\uc0\u8208 day.\'94\
\
\'93Poetry is rubbish!\'94 said Smerdyakov curtly.\
\
\'93Oh, no! I am very fond of poetry.\'94\
\
\'93So far as it\'92s poetry, it\'92s essential rubbish. Consider yourself, who\
ever talks in rhyme? And if we were all to talk in rhyme, even though it\
were decreed by government, we shouldn\'92t say much, should we? Poetry is no\
good, Marya Kondratyevna.\'94\
\
\'93How clever you are! How is it you\'92ve gone so deep into everything?\'94 The\
woman\'92s voice was more and more insinuating.\
\
\'93I could have done better than that. I could have known more than that, if\
it had not been for my destiny from my childhood up. I would have shot a\
man in a duel if he called me names because I am descended from a filthy\
beggar and have no father. And they used to throw it in my teeth in\
Moscow. It had reached them from here, thanks to Grigory Vassilyevitch.\
Grigory Vassilyevitch blames me for rebelling against my birth, but I\
would have sanctioned their killing me before I was born that I might not\
have come into the world at all. They used to say in the market, and your\
mamma too, with great lack of delicacy, set off telling me that her hair\
was like a mat on her head, and that she was short of five foot by a wee\
bit. Why talk of a wee bit while she might have said \'91a little bit,\'92 like\
every one else? She wanted to make it touching, a regular peasant\'92s\
feeling. Can a Russian peasant be said to feel, in comparison with an\
educated man? He can\'92t be said to have feeling at all, in his ignorance.\
From my childhood up when I hear \'91a wee bit,\'92 I am ready to burst with\
rage. I hate all Russia, Marya Kondratyevna.\'94\
\
\'93If you\'92d been a cadet in the army, or a young hussar, you wouldn\'92t have\
talked like that, but would have drawn your saber to defend all Russia.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t want to be a hussar, Marya Kondratyevna, and, what\'92s more, I\
should like to abolish all soldiers.\'94\
\
\'93And when an enemy comes, who is going to defend us?\'94\
\
\'93There\'92s no need of defense. In 1812 there was a great invasion of Russia\
by Napoleon, first Emperor of the French, father of the present one, and\
it would have been a good thing if they had conquered us. A clever nation\
would have conquered a very stupid one and annexed it. We should have had\
quite different institutions.\'94\
\
\'93Are they so much better in their own country than we are? I wouldn\'92t\
change a dandy I know of for three young Englishmen,\'94 observed Marya\
Kondratyevna tenderly, doubtless accompanying her words with a most\
languishing glance.\
\
\'93That\'92s as one prefers.\'94\
\
\'93But you are just like a foreigner\'97just like a most gentlemanly foreigner.\
I tell you that, though it makes me bashful.\'94\
\
\'93If you care to know, the folks there and ours here are just alike in\
their vice. They are swindlers, only there the scoundrel wears polished\
boots and here he grovels in filth and sees no harm in it. The Russian\
people want thrashing, as Fyodor Pavlovitch said very truly yesterday,\
though he is mad, and all his children.\'94\
\
\'93You said yourself you had such a respect for Ivan Fyodorovitch.\'94\
\
\'93But he said I was a stinking lackey. He thinks that I might be unruly. He\
is mistaken there. If I had a certain sum in my pocket, I would have left\
here long ago. Dmitri Fyodorovitch is lower than any lackey in his\
behavior, in his mind, and in his poverty. He doesn\'92t know how to do\
anything, and yet he is respected by every one. I may be only a soup\uc0\u8208 \
maker, but with luck I could open a caf\'e9 restaurant in Petrovka, in\
Moscow, for my cookery is something special, and there\'92s no one in Moscow,\
except the foreigners, whose cookery is anything special. Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch is a beggar, but if he were to challenge the son of the first\
count in the country, he\'92d fight him. Though in what way is he better than\
I am? For he is ever so much stupider than I am. Look at the money he has\
wasted without any need!\'94\
\
\'93It must be lovely, a duel,\'94 Marya Kondratyevna observed suddenly.\
\
\'93How so?\'94\
\
\'93It must be so dreadful and so brave, especially when young officers with\
pistols in their hands pop at one another for the sake of some lady. A\
perfect picture! Ah, if only girls were allowed to look on, I\'92d give\
anything to see one!\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s all very well when you are firing at some one, but when he is firing\
straight in your mug, you must feel pretty silly. You\'92d be glad to run\
away, Marya Kondratyevna.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t mean you would run away?\'94 But Smerdyakov did not deign to\
reply. After a moment\'92s silence the guitar tinkled again, and he sang\
again in the same falsetto:\
\
\
    Whatever you may say,\
    I shall go far away.\
    Life will be bright and gay\
    In the city far away.\
    I shall not grieve,\
    I shall not grieve at all,\
    I don\'92t intend to grieve at all.\
\
\
Then something unexpected happened. Alyosha suddenly sneezed. They were\
silent. Alyosha got up and walked towards them. He found Smerdyakov\
dressed up and wearing polished boots, his hair pomaded, and perhaps\
curled. The guitar lay on the garden\uc0\u8208 seat. His companion was the daughter\
of the house, wearing a light\uc0\u8208 blue dress with a train two yards long. She\
was young and would not have been bad\uc0\u8208 looking, but that her face was so\
round and terribly freckled.\
\
\'93Will my brother Dmitri soon be back?\'94 asked Alyosha with as much\
composure as he could.\
\
Smerdyakov got up slowly; Marya Kondratyevna rose too.\
\
\'93How am I to know about Dmitri Fyodorovitch? It\'92s not as if I were his\
keeper,\'94 answered Smerdyakov quietly, distinctly, and superciliously.\
\
\'93But I simply asked whether you do know?\'94 Alyosha explained.\
\
\'93I know nothing of his whereabouts and don\'92t want to.\'94\
\
\'93But my brother told me that you let him know all that goes on in the\
house, and promised to let him know when Agrafena Alexandrovna comes.\'94\
\
Smerdyakov turned a deliberate, unmoved glance upon him.\
\
\'93And how did you get in this time, since the gate was bolted an hour ago?\'94\
he asked, looking at Alyosha.\
\
\'93I came in from the back\uc0\u8208 alley, over the fence, and went straight to the\
summer\uc0\u8208 house. I hope you\'92ll forgive me,\'94 he added, addressing Marya\
Kondratyevna. \'93I was in a hurry to find my brother.\'94\
\
\'93Ach, as though we could take it amiss in you!\'94 drawled Marya\
Kondratyevna, flattered by Alyosha\'92s apology. \'93For Dmitri Fyodorovitch\
often goes to the summer\uc0\u8208 house in that way. We don\'92t know he is here and\
he is sitting in the summer\uc0\u8208 house.\'94\
\
\'93I am very anxious to find him, or to learn from you where he is now.\
Believe me, it\'92s on business of great importance to him.\'94\
\
\'93He never tells us,\'94 lisped Marya Kondratyevna.\
\
\'93Though I used to come here as a friend,\'94 Smerdyakov began again, \'93Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch has pestered me in a merciless way even here by his incessant\
questions about the master. \'91What news?\'92 he\'92ll ask. \'91What\'92s going on in\
there now? Who\'92s coming and going?\'92 and can\'92t I tell him something more.\
Twice already he\'92s threatened me with death.\'94\
\
\'93With death?\'94 Alyosha exclaimed in surprise.\
\
\'93Do you suppose he\'92d think much of that, with his temper, which you had a\
chance of observing yourself yesterday? He says if I let Agrafena\
Alexandrovna in and she passes the night there, I\'92ll be the first to\
suffer for it. I am terribly afraid of him, and if I were not even more\
afraid of doing so, I ought to let the police know. God only knows what he\
might not do!\'94\
\
\'93His honor said to him the other day, \'91I\'92ll pound you in a mortar!\'92 \'94\
added Marya Kondratyevna.\
\
\'93Oh, if it\'92s pounding in a mortar, it may be only talk,\'94 observed Alyosha.\
\'93If I could meet him, I might speak to him about that too.\'94\
\
\'93Well, the only thing I can tell you is this,\'94 said Smerdyakov, as though\
thinking better of it; \'93I am here as an old friend and neighbor, and it\
would be odd if I didn\'92t come. On the other hand, Ivan Fyodorovitch sent\
me first thing this morning to your brother\'92s lodging in Lake Street,\
without a letter, but with a message to Dmitri Fyodorovitch to go to dine\
with him at the restaurant here, in the market\uc0\u8208 place. I went, but didn\'92t\
find Dmitri Fyodorovitch at home, though it was eight o\'92clock. \'91He\'92s been\
here, but he is quite gone,\'92 those were the very words of his landlady.\
It\'92s as though there was an understanding between them. Perhaps at this\
moment he is in the restaurant with Ivan Fyodorovitch, for Ivan\
Fyodorovitch has not been home to dinner and Fyodor Pavlovitch dined alone\
an hour ago, and is gone to lie down. But I beg you most particularly not\
to speak of me and of what I have told you, for he\'92d kill me for nothing\
at all.\'94\
\
\'93Brother Ivan invited Dmitri to the restaurant to\uc0\u8208 day?\'94 repeated Alyosha\
quickly.\
\
\'93That\'92s so.\'94\
\
\'93The Metropolis tavern in the market\uc0\u8208 place?\'94\
\
\'93The very same.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s quite likely,\'94 cried Alyosha, much excited. \'93Thank you,\
Smerdyakov; that\'92s important. I\'92ll go there at once.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t betray me,\'94 Smerdyakov called after him.\
\
\'93Oh, no, I\'92ll go to the tavern as though by chance. Don\'92t be anxious.\'94\
\
\'93But wait a minute, I\'92ll open the gate to you,\'94 cried Marya Kondratyevna.\
\
\'93No; it\'92s a short cut, I\'92ll get over the fence again.\'94\
\
What he had heard threw Alyosha into great agitation. He ran to the\
tavern. It was impossible for him to go into the tavern in his monastic\
dress, but he could inquire at the entrance for his brothers and call them\
down. But just as he reached the tavern, a window was flung open, and his\
brother Ivan called down to him from it.\
\
\'93Alyosha, can\'92t you come up here to me? I shall be awfully grateful.\'94\
\
\'93To be sure I can, only I don\'92t quite know whether in this dress\'97\'94\
\
\'93But I am in a room apart. Come up the steps; I\'92ll run down to meet you.\'94\
\
A minute later Alyosha was sitting beside his brother. Ivan was alone\
dining.\
\
\
\
Chapter III. The Brothers Make Friends\
\
\
Ivan was not, however, in a separate room, but only in a place shut off by\
a screen, so that it was unseen by other people in the room. It was the\
first room from the entrance with a buffet along the wall. Waiters were\
continually darting to and fro in it. The only customer in the room was an\
old retired military man drinking tea in a corner. But there was the usual\
bustle going on in the other rooms of the tavern; there were shouts for\
the waiters, the sound of popping corks, the click of billiard balls, the\
drone of the organ. Alyosha knew that Ivan did not usually visit this\
tavern and disliked taverns in general. So he must have come here, he\
reflected, simply to meet Dmitri by arrangement. Yet Dmitri was not there.\
\
\'93Shall I order you fish, soup or anything. You don\'92t live on tea alone, I\
suppose,\'94 cried Ivan, apparently delighted at having got hold of Alyosha.\
He had finished dinner and was drinking tea.\
\
\'93Let me have soup, and tea afterwards, I am hungry,\'94 said Alyosha gayly.\
\
\'93And cherry jam? They have it here. You remember how you used to love\
cherry jam when you were little?\'94\
\
\'93You remember that? Let me have jam too, I like it still.\'94\
\
Ivan rang for the waiter and ordered soup, jam and tea.\
\
\'93I remember everything, Alyosha, I remember you till you were eleven, I\
was nearly fifteen. There\'92s such a difference between fifteen and eleven\
that brothers are never companions at those ages. I don\'92t know whether I\
was fond of you even. When I went away to Moscow for the first few years I\
never thought of you at all. Then, when you came to Moscow yourself, we\
only met once somewhere, I believe. And now I\'92ve been here more than three\
months, and so far we have scarcely said a word to each other. To\uc0\u8208 morrow I\
am going away, and I was just thinking as I sat here how I could see you\
to say good\uc0\u8208 by and just then you passed.\'94\
\
\'93Were you very anxious to see me, then?\'94\
\
\'93Very. I want to get to know you once for all, and I want you to know me.\
And then to say good\uc0\u8208 by. I believe it\'92s always best to get to know people\
just before leaving them. I\'92ve noticed how you\'92ve been looking at me these\
three months. There has been a continual look of expectation in your eyes,\
and I can\'92t endure that. That\'92s how it is I\'92ve kept away from you. But in\
the end I have learned to respect you. The little man stands firm, I\
thought. Though I am laughing, I am serious. You do stand firm, don\'92t you?\
I like people who are firm like that whatever it is they stand by, even if\
they are such little fellows as you. Your expectant eyes ceased to annoy\
me, I grew fond of them in the end, those expectant eyes. You seem to love\
me for some reason, Alyosha?\'94\
\
\'93I do love you, Ivan. Dmitri says of you\'97Ivan is a tomb! I say of you,\
Ivan is a riddle. You are a riddle to me even now. But I understand\
something in you, and I did not understand it till this morning.\'94\
\
\'93What\'92s that?\'94 laughed Ivan.\
\
\'93You won\'92t be angry?\'94 Alyosha laughed too.\
\
\'93Well?\'94\
\
\'93That you are just as young as other young men of three and twenty, that\
you are just a young and fresh and nice boy, green in fact! Now, have I\
insulted you dreadfully?\'94\
\
\'93On the contrary, I am struck by a coincidence,\'94 cried Ivan, warmly and\
good\uc0\u8208 humoredly. \'93Would you believe it that ever since that scene with her,\
I have thought of nothing else but my youthful greenness, and just as\
though you guessed that, you begin about it. Do you know I\'92ve been sitting\
here thinking to myself: that if I didn\'92t believe in life, if I lost faith\
in the woman I love, lost faith in the order of things, were convinced in\
fact that everything is a disorderly, damnable, and perhaps devil\uc0\u8208 ridden\
chaos, if I were struck by every horror of man\'92s disillusionment\'97still I\
should want to live and, having once tasted of the cup, I would not turn\
away from it till I had drained it! At thirty, though, I shall be sure to\
leave the cup, even if I\'92ve not emptied it, and turn away\'97where I don\'92t\
know. But till I am thirty, I know that my youth will triumph over\
everything\'97every disillusionment, every disgust with life. I\'92ve asked\
myself many times whether there is in the world any despair that would\
overcome this frantic and perhaps unseemly thirst for life in me, and I\'92ve\
come to the conclusion that there isn\'92t, that is till I am thirty, and\
then I shall lose it of myself, I fancy. Some driveling consumptive\
moralists\'97and poets especially\'97often call that thirst for life base. It\'92s\
a feature of the Karamazovs, it\'92s true, that thirst for life regardless of\
everything; you have it no doubt too, but why is it base? The centripetal\
force on our planet is still fearfully strong, Alyosha. I have a longing\
for life, and I go on living in spite of logic. Though I may not believe\
in the order of the universe, yet I love the sticky little leaves as they\
open in spring. I love the blue sky, I love some people, whom one loves\
you know sometimes without knowing why. I love some great deeds done by\
men, though I\'92ve long ceased perhaps to have faith in them, yet from old\
habit one\'92s heart prizes them. Here they have brought the soup for you,\
eat it, it will do you good. It\'92s first\uc0\u8208 rate soup, they know how to make\
it here. I want to travel in Europe, Alyosha, I shall set off from here.\
And yet I know that I am only going to a graveyard, but it\'92s a most\
precious graveyard, that\'92s what it is! Precious are the dead that lie\
there, every stone over them speaks of such burning life in the past, of\
such passionate faith in their work, their truth, their struggle and their\
science, that I know I shall fall on the ground and kiss those stones and\
weep over them; though I\'92m convinced in my heart that it\'92s long been\
nothing but a graveyard. And I shall not weep from despair, but simply\
because I shall be happy in my tears, I shall steep my soul in my emotion.\
I love the sticky leaves in spring, the blue sky\'97that\'92s all it is. It\'92s\
not a matter of intellect or logic, it\'92s loving with one\'92s inside, with\
one\'92s stomach. One loves the first strength of one\'92s youth. Do you\
understand anything of my tirade, Alyosha?\'94 Ivan laughed suddenly.\
\
\'93I understand too well, Ivan. One longs to love with one\'92s inside, with\
one\'92s stomach. You said that so well and I am awfully glad that you have\
such a longing for life,\'94 cried Alyosha. \'93I think every one should love\
life above everything in the world.\'94\
\
\'93Love life more than the meaning of it?\'94\
\
\'93Certainly, love it, regardless of logic as you say, it must be regardless\
of logic, and it\'92s only then one will understand the meaning of it. I have\
thought so a long time. Half your work is done, Ivan, you love life, now\
you\'92ve only to try to do the second half and you are saved.\'94\
\
\'93You are trying to save me, but perhaps I am not lost! And what does your\
second half mean?\'94\
\
\'93Why, one has to raise up your dead, who perhaps have not died after all.\
Come, let me have tea. I am so glad of our talk, Ivan.\'94\
\
\'93I see you are feeling inspired. I am awfully fond of such _professions de\
foi_ from such\'97novices. You are a steadfast person, Alexey. Is it true\
that you mean to leave the monastery?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, my elder sends me out into the world.\'94\
\
\'93We shall see each other then in the world. We shall meet before I am\
thirty, when I shall begin to turn aside from the cup. Father doesn\'92t want\
to turn aside from his cup till he is seventy, he dreams of hanging on to\
eighty in fact, so he says. He means it only too seriously, though he is a\
buffoon. He stands on a firm rock, too, he stands on his sensuality\'97though\
after we are thirty, indeed, there may be nothing else to stand on.... But\
to hang on to seventy is nasty, better only to thirty; one might retain \'91a\
shadow of nobility\'92 by deceiving oneself. Have you seen Dmitri to\uc0\u8208 day?\'94\
\
\'93No, but I saw Smerdyakov,\'94 and Alyosha rapidly, though minutely,\
described his meeting with Smerdyakov. Ivan began listening anxiously and\
questioned him.\
\
\'93But he begged me not to tell Dmitri that he had told me about him,\'94 added\
Alyosha. Ivan frowned and pondered.\
\
\'93Are you frowning on Smerdyakov\'92s account?\'94 asked Alyosha.\
\
\'93Yes, on his account. Damn him, I certainly did want to see Dmitri, but\
now there\'92s no need,\'94 said Ivan reluctantly.\
\
\'93But are you really going so soon, brother?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93What of Dmitri and father? how will it end?\'94 asked Alyosha anxiously.\
\
\'93You are always harping upon it! What have I to do with it? Am I my\
brother Dmitri\'92s keeper?\'94 Ivan snapped irritably, but then he suddenly\
smiled bitterly. \'93Cain\'92s answer about his murdered brother, wasn\'92t it?\
Perhaps that\'92s what you\'92re thinking at this moment? Well, damn it all, I\
can\'92t stay here to be their keeper, can I? I\'92ve finished what I had to do,\
and I am going. Do you imagine I am jealous of Dmitri, that I\'92ve been\
trying to steal his beautiful Katerina Ivanovna for the last three months?\
Nonsense, I had business of my own. I finished it. I am going. I finished\
it just now, you were witness.\'94\
\
\'93At Katerina Ivanovna\'92s?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, and I\'92ve released myself once for all. And after all, what have I to\
do with Dmitri? Dmitri doesn\'92t come in. I had my own business to settle\
with Katerina Ivanovna. You know, on the contrary, that Dmitri behaved as\
though there was an understanding between us. I didn\'92t ask him to do it,\
but he solemnly handed her over to me and gave us his blessing. It\'92s all\
too funny. Ah, Alyosha, if you only knew how light my heart is now! Would\
you believe, it, I sat here eating my dinner and was nearly ordering\
champagne to celebrate my first hour of freedom. Tfoo! It\'92s been going on\
nearly six months, and all at once I\'92ve thrown it off. I could never have\
guessed even yesterday, how easy it would be to put an end to it if I\
wanted.\'94\
\
\'93You are speaking of your love, Ivan?\'94\
\
\'93Of my love, if you like. I fell in love with the young lady, I worried\
myself over her and she worried me. I sat watching over her ... and all at\
once it\'92s collapsed! I spoke this morning with inspiration, but I went\
away and roared with laughter. Would you believe it? Yes, it\'92s the literal\
truth.\'94\
\
\'93You seem very merry about it now,\'94 observed Alyosha, looking into his\
face, which had suddenly grown brighter.\
\
\'93But how could I tell that I didn\'92t care for her a bit! Ha ha! It appears\
after all I didn\'92t. And yet how she attracted me! How attractive she was\
just now when I made my speech! And do you know she attracts me awfully\
even now, yet how easy it is to leave her. Do you think I am boasting?\'94\
\
\'93No, only perhaps it wasn\'92t love.\'94\
\
\'93Alyosha,\'94 laughed Ivan, \'93don\'92t make reflections about love, it\'92s unseemly\
for you. How you rushed into the discussion this morning! I\'92ve forgotten\
to kiss you for it.... But how she tormented me! It certainly was sitting\
by a \'91laceration.\'92 Ah, she knew how I loved her! She loved me and not\
Dmitri,\'94 Ivan insisted gayly. \'93Her feeling for Dmitri was simply a self\uc0\u8208 \
laceration. All I told her just now was perfectly true, but the worst of\
it is, it may take her fifteen or twenty years to find out that she\
doesn\'92t care for Dmitri, and loves me whom she torments, and perhaps she\
may never find it out at all, in spite of her lesson to\uc0\u8208 day. Well, it\'92s\
better so; I can simply go away for good. By the way, how is she now? What\
happened after I departed?\'94\
\
Alyosha told him she had been hysterical, and that she was now, he heard,\
unconscious and delirious.\
\
\'93Isn\'92t Madame Hohlakov laying it on?\'94\
\
\'93I think not.\'94\
\
\'93I must find out. Nobody dies of hysterics, though. They don\'92t matter. God\
gave woman hysterics as a relief. I won\'92t go to her at all. Why push\
myself forward again?\'94\
\
\'93But you told her that she had never cared for you.\'94\
\
\'93I did that on purpose. Alyosha, shall I call for some champagne? Let us\
drink to my freedom. Ah, if only you knew how glad I am!\'94\
\
\'93No, brother, we had better not drink,\'94 said Alyosha suddenly. \'93Besides I\
feel somehow depressed.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, you\'92ve been depressed a long time, I\'92ve noticed it.\'94\
\
\'93Have you settled to go to\uc0\u8208 morrow morning, then?\'94\
\
\'93Morning? I didn\'92t say I should go in the morning.... But perhaps it may\
be the morning. Would you believe it, I dined here to\uc0\u8208 day only to avoid\
dining with the old man, I loathe him so. I should have left long ago, so\
far as he is concerned. But why are you so worried about my going away?\
We\'92ve plenty of time before I go, an eternity!\'94\
\
\'93If you are going away to\uc0\u8208 morrow, what do you mean by an eternity?\'94\
\
\'93But what does it matter to us?\'94 laughed Ivan. \'93We\'92ve time enough for our\
talk, for what brought us here. Why do you look so surprised? Answer: why\
have we met here? To talk of my love for Katerina Ivanovna, of the old man\
and Dmitri? of foreign travel? of the fatal position of Russia? Of the\
Emperor Napoleon? Is that it?\'94\
\
\'93No.\'94\
\
\'93Then you know what for. It\'92s different for other people; but we in our\
green youth have to settle the eternal questions first of all. That\'92s what\
we care about. Young Russia is talking about nothing but the eternal\
questions now. Just when the old folks are all taken up with practical\
questions. Why have you been looking at me in expectation for the last\
three months? To ask me, \'91What do you believe, or don\'92t you believe at\
all?\'92 That\'92s what your eyes have been meaning for these three months,\
haven\'92t they?\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps so,\'94 smiled Alyosha. \'93You are not laughing at me, now, Ivan?\'94\
\
\'93Me laughing! I don\'92t want to wound my little brother who has been\
watching me with such expectation for three months. Alyosha, look straight\
at me! Of course I am just such a little boy as you are, only not a\
novice. And what have Russian boys been doing up till now, some of them, I\
mean? In this stinking tavern, for instance, here, they meet and sit down\
in a corner. They\'92ve never met in their lives before and, when they go out\
of the tavern, they won\'92t meet again for forty years. And what do they\
talk about in that momentary halt in the tavern? Of the eternal questions,\
of the existence of God and immortality. And those who do not believe in\
God talk of socialism or anarchism, of the transformation of all humanity\
on a new pattern, so that it all comes to the same, they\'92re the same\
questions turned inside out. And masses, masses of the most original\
Russian boys do nothing but talk of the eternal questions! Isn\'92t it so?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, for real Russians the questions of God\'92s existence and of\
immortality, or, as you say, the same questions turned inside out, come\
first and foremost, of course, and so they should,\'94 said Alyosha, still\
watching his brother with the same gentle and inquiring smile.\
\
\'93Well, Alyosha, it\'92s sometimes very unwise to be a Russian at all, but\
anything stupider than the way Russian boys spend their time one can\
hardly imagine. But there\'92s one Russian boy called Alyosha I am awfully\
fond of.\'94\
\
\'93How nicely you put that in!\'94 Alyosha laughed suddenly.\
\
\'93Well, tell me where to begin, give your orders. The existence of God,\
eh?\'94\
\
\'93Begin where you like. You declared yesterday at father\'92s that there was\
no God.\'94 Alyosha looked searchingly at his brother.\
\
\'93I said that yesterday at dinner on purpose to tease you and I saw your\
eyes glow. But now I\'92ve no objection to discussing with you, and I say so\
very seriously. I want to be friends with you, Alyosha, for I have no\
friends and want to try it. Well, only fancy, perhaps I too accept God,\'94\
laughed Ivan; \'93that\'92s a surprise for you, isn\'92t it?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, of course, if you are not joking now.\'94\
\
\'93Joking? I was told at the elder\'92s yesterday that I was joking. You know,\
dear boy, there was an old sinner in the eighteenth century who declared\
that, if there were no God, he would have to be invented. _S\'92il n\'92existait\
pas Dieu, il faudrait l\'92inventer._ And man has actually invented God. And\
what\'92s strange, what would be marvelous, is not that God should really\
exist; the marvel is that such an idea, the idea of the necessity of God,\
could enter the head of such a savage, vicious beast as man. So holy it\
is, so touching, so wise and so great a credit it does to man. As for me,\
I\'92ve long resolved not to think whether man created God or God man. And I\
won\'92t go through all the axioms laid down by Russian boys on that subject,\
all derived from European hypotheses; for what\'92s a hypothesis there, is an\
axiom with the Russian boy, and not only with the boys but with their\
teachers too, for our Russian professors are often just the same boys\
themselves. And so I omit all the hypotheses. For what are we aiming at\
now? I am trying to explain as quickly as possible my essential nature,\
that is what manner of man I am, what I believe in, and for what I hope,\
that\'92s it, isn\'92t it? And therefore I tell you that I accept God simply.\
But you must note this: if God exists and if He really did create the\
world, then, as we all know, He created it according to the geometry of\
Euclid and the human mind with the conception of only three dimensions in\
space. Yet there have been and still are geometricians and philosophers,\
and even some of the most distinguished, who doubt whether the whole\
universe, or to speak more widely the whole of being, was only created in\
Euclid\'92s geometry; they even dare to dream that two parallel lines, which\
according to Euclid can never meet on earth, may meet somewhere in\
infinity. I have come to the conclusion that, since I can\'92t understand\
even that, I can\'92t expect to understand about God. I acknowledge humbly\
that I have no faculty for settling such questions, I have a Euclidian\
earthly mind, and how could I solve problems that are not of this world?\
And I advise you never to think about it either, my dear Alyosha,\
especially about God, whether He exists or not. All such questions are\
utterly inappropriate for a mind created with an idea of only three\
dimensions. And so I accept God and am glad to, and what\'92s more, I accept\
His wisdom, His purpose\'97which are utterly beyond our ken; I believe in the\
underlying order and the meaning of life; I believe in the eternal harmony\
in which they say we shall one day be blended. I believe in the Word to\
Which the universe is striving, and Which Itself was \'91with God,\'92 and Which\
Itself is God and so on, and so on, to infinity. There are all sorts of\
phrases for it. I seem to be on the right path, don\'92t I? Yet would you\
believe it, in the final result I don\'92t accept this world of God\'92s, and,\
although I know it exists, I don\'92t accept it at all. It\'92s not that I don\'92t\
accept God, you must understand, it\'92s the world created by Him I don\'92t and\
cannot accept. Let me make it plain. I believe like a child that suffering\
will be healed and made up for, that all the humiliating absurdity of\
human contradictions will vanish like a pitiful mirage, like the\
despicable fabrication of the impotent and infinitely small Euclidian mind\
of man, that in the world\'92s finale, at the moment of eternal harmony,\
something so precious will come to pass that it will suffice for all\
hearts, for the comforting of all resentments, for the atonement of all\
the crimes of humanity, of all the blood they\'92ve shed; that it will make\
it not only possible to forgive but to justify all that has happened with\
men\'97but though all that may come to pass, I don\'92t accept it. I won\'92t\
accept it. Even if parallel lines do meet and I see it myself, I shall see\
it and say that they\'92ve met, but still I won\'92t accept it. That\'92s what\'92s at\
the root of me, Alyosha; that\'92s my creed. I am in earnest in what I say. I\
began our talk as stupidly as I could on purpose, but I\'92ve led up to my\
confession, for that\'92s all you want. You didn\'92t want to hear about God,\
but only to know what the brother you love lives by. And so I\'92ve told\
you.\'94\
\
Ivan concluded his long tirade with marked and unexpected feeling.\
\
\'93And why did you begin \'91as stupidly as you could\'92?\'94 asked Alyosha, looking\
dreamily at him.\
\
\'93To begin with, for the sake of being Russian. Russian conversations on\
such subjects are always carried on inconceivably stupidly. And secondly,\
the stupider one is, the closer one is to reality. The stupider one is,\
the clearer one is. Stupidity is brief and artless, while intelligence\
wriggles and hides itself. Intelligence is a knave, but stupidity is\
honest and straightforward. I\'92ve led the conversation to my despair, and\
the more stupidly I have presented it, the better for me.\'94\
\
\'93You will explain why you don\'92t accept the world?\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93To be sure I will, it\'92s not a secret, that\'92s what I\'92ve been leading up\
to. Dear little brother, I don\'92t want to corrupt you or to turn you from\
your stronghold, perhaps I want to be healed by you.\'94 Ivan smiled suddenly\
quite like a little gentle child. Alyosha had never seen such a smile on\
his face before.\
\
\
\
Chapter IV. Rebellion\
\
\
\'93I must make you one confession,\'94 Ivan began. \'93I could never understand\
how one can love one\'92s neighbors. It\'92s just one\'92s neighbors, to my mind,\
that one can\'92t love, though one might love those at a distance. I once\
read somewhere of John the Merciful, a saint, that when a hungry, frozen\
beggar came to him, he took him into his bed, held him in his arms, and\
began breathing into his mouth, which was putrid and loathsome from some\
awful disease. I am convinced that he did that from \'91self\uc0\u8208 laceration,\'92\
from the self\uc0\u8208 laceration of falsity, for the sake of the charity imposed\
by duty, as a penance laid on him. For any one to love a man, he must be\
hidden, for as soon as he shows his face, love is gone.\'94\
\
\'93Father Zossima has talked of that more than once,\'94 observed Alyosha; \'93he,\
too, said that the face of a man often hinders many people not practiced\
in love, from loving him. But yet there\'92s a great deal of love in mankind,\
and almost Christ\uc0\u8208 like love. I know that myself, Ivan.\'94\
\
\'93Well, I know nothing of it so far, and can\'92t understand it, and the\
innumerable mass of mankind are with me there. The question is, whether\
that\'92s due to men\'92s bad qualities or whether it\'92s inherent in their\
nature. To my thinking, Christ\uc0\u8208 like love for men is a miracle impossible\
on earth. He was God. But we are not gods. Suppose I, for instance, suffer\
intensely. Another can never know how much I suffer, because he is another\
and not I. And what\'92s more, a man is rarely ready to admit another\'92s\
suffering (as though it were a distinction). Why won\'92t he admit it, do you\
think? Because I smell unpleasant, because I have a stupid face, because I\
once trod on his foot. Besides, there is suffering and suffering;\
degrading, humiliating suffering such as humbles me\'97hunger, for\
instance\'97my benefactor will perhaps allow me; but when you come to higher\
suffering\'97for an idea, for instance\'97he will very rarely admit that,\
perhaps because my face strikes him as not at all what he fancies a man\
should have who suffers for an idea. And so he deprives me instantly of\
his favor, and not at all from badness of heart. Beggars, especially\
genteel beggars, ought never to show themselves, but to ask for charity\
through the newspapers. One can love one\'92s neighbors in the abstract, or\
even at a distance, but at close quarters it\'92s almost impossible. If it\
were as on the stage, in the ballet, where if beggars come in, they wear\
silken rags and tattered lace and beg for alms dancing gracefully, then\
one might like looking at them. But even then we should not love them. But\
enough of that. I simply wanted to show you my point of view. I meant to\
speak of the suffering of mankind generally, but we had better confine\
ourselves to the sufferings of the children. That reduces the scope of my\
argument to a tenth of what it would be. Still we\'92d better keep to the\
children, though it does weaken my case. But, in the first place, children\
can be loved even at close quarters, even when they are dirty, even when\
they are ugly (I fancy, though, children never are ugly). The second\
reason why I won\'92t speak of grown\uc0\u8208 up people is that, besides being\
disgusting and unworthy of love, they have a compensation\'97they\'92ve eaten\
the apple and know good and evil, and they have become \'91like gods.\'92 They\
go on eating it still. But the children haven\'92t eaten anything, and are so\
far innocent. Are you fond of children, Alyosha? I know you are, and you\
will understand why I prefer to speak of them. If they, too, suffer\
horribly on earth, they must suffer for their fathers\'92 sins, they must be\
punished for their fathers, who have eaten the apple; but that reasoning\
is of the other world and is incomprehensible for the heart of man here on\
earth. The innocent must not suffer for another\'92s sins, and especially\
such innocents! You may be surprised at me, Alyosha, but I am awfully fond\
of children, too. And observe, cruel people, the violent, the rapacious,\
the Karamazovs are sometimes very fond of children. Children while they\
are quite little\'97up to seven, for instance\'97are so remote from grown\uc0\u8208 up\
people; they are different creatures, as it were, of a different species.\
I knew a criminal in prison who had, in the course of his career as a\
burglar, murdered whole families, including several children. But when he\
was in prison, he had a strange affection for them. He spent all his time\
at his window, watching the children playing in the prison yard. He\
trained one little boy to come up to his window and made great friends\
with him.... You don\'92t know why I am telling you all this, Alyosha? My\
head aches and I am sad.\'94\
\
\'93You speak with a strange air,\'94 observed Alyosha uneasily, \'93as though you\
were not quite yourself.\'94\
\
\'93By the way, a Bulgarian I met lately in Moscow,\'94 Ivan went on, seeming\
not to hear his brother\'92s words, \'93told me about the crimes committed by\
Turks and Circassians in all parts of Bulgaria through fear of a general\
rising of the Slavs. They burn villages, murder, outrage women and\
children, they nail their prisoners by the ears to the fences, leave them\
so till morning, and in the morning they hang them\'97all sorts of things you\
can\'92t imagine. People talk sometimes of bestial cruelty, but that\'92s a\
great injustice and insult to the beasts; a beast can never be so cruel as\
a man, so artistically cruel. The tiger only tears and gnaws, that\'92s all\
he can do. He would never think of nailing people by the ears, even if he\
were able to do it. These Turks took a pleasure in torturing children,\
too; cutting the unborn child from the mother\'92s womb, and tossing babies\
up in the air and catching them on the points of their bayonets before\
their mothers\'92 eyes. Doing it before the mothers\'92 eyes was what gave zest\
to the amusement. Here is another scene that I thought very interesting.\
Imagine a trembling mother with her baby in her arms, a circle of invading\
Turks around her. They\'92ve planned a diversion: they pet the baby, laugh to\
make it laugh. They succeed, the baby laughs. At that moment a Turk points\
a pistol four inches from the baby\'92s face. The baby laughs with glee,\
holds out its little hands to the pistol, and he pulls the trigger in the\
baby\'92s face and blows out its brains. Artistic, wasn\'92t it? By the way,\
Turks are particularly fond of sweet things, they say.\'94\
\
\'93Brother, what are you driving at?\'94 asked Alyosha.\
\
\'93I think if the devil doesn\'92t exist, but man has created him, he has\
created him in his own image and likeness.\'94\
\
\'93Just as he did God, then?\'94 observed Alyosha.\
\
\'93 \'91It\'92s wonderful how you can turn words,\'92 as Polonius says in _Hamlet_,\'94\
laughed Ivan. \'93You turn my words against me. Well, I am glad. Yours must\
be a fine God, if man created Him in his image and likeness. You asked\
just now what I was driving at. You see, I am fond of collecting certain\
facts, and, would you believe, I even copy anecdotes of a certain sort\
from newspapers and books, and I\'92ve already got a fine collection. The\
Turks, of course, have gone into it, but they are foreigners. I have\
specimens from home that are even better than the Turks. You know we\
prefer beating\'97rods and scourges\'97that\'92s our national institution. Nailing\
ears is unthinkable for us, for we are, after all, Europeans. But the rod\
and the scourge we have always with us and they cannot be taken from us.\
Abroad now they scarcely do any beating. Manners are more humane, or laws\
have been passed, so that they don\'92t dare to flog men now. But they make\
up for it in another way just as national as ours. And so national that it\
would be practically impossible among us, though I believe we are being\
inoculated with it, since the religious movement began in our aristocracy.\
I have a charming pamphlet, translated from the French, describing how,\
quite recently, five years ago, a murderer, Richard, was executed\'97a young\
man, I believe, of three and twenty, who repented and was converted to the\
Christian faith at the very scaffold. This Richard was an illegitimate\
child who was given as a child of six by his parents to some shepherds on\
the Swiss mountains. They brought him up to work for them. He grew up like\
a little wild beast among them. The shepherds taught him nothing, and\
scarcely fed or clothed him, but sent him out at seven to herd the flock\
in cold and wet, and no one hesitated or scrupled to treat him so. Quite\
the contrary, they thought they had every right, for Richard had been\
given to them as a chattel, and they did not even see the necessity of\
feeding him. Richard himself describes how in those years, like the\
Prodigal Son in the Gospel, he longed to eat of the mash given to the\
pigs, which were fattened for sale. But they wouldn\'92t even give him that,\
and beat him when he stole from the pigs. And that was how he spent all\
his childhood and his youth, till he grew up and was strong enough to go\
away and be a thief. The savage began to earn his living as a day laborer\
in Geneva. He drank what he earned, he lived like a brute, and finished by\
killing and robbing an old man. He was caught, tried, and condemned to\
death. They are not sentimentalists there. And in prison he was\
immediately surrounded by pastors, members of Christian brotherhoods,\
philanthropic ladies, and the like. They taught him to read and write in\
prison, and expounded the Gospel to him. They exhorted him, worked upon\
him, drummed at him incessantly, till at last he solemnly confessed his\
crime. He was converted. He wrote to the court himself that he was a\
monster, but that in the end God had vouchsafed him light and shown grace.\
All Geneva was in excitement about him\'97all philanthropic and religious\
Geneva. All the aristocratic and well\uc0\u8208 bred society of the town rushed to\
the prison, kissed Richard and embraced him; \'91You are our brother, you\
have found grace.\'92 And Richard does nothing but weep with emotion, \'91Yes,\
I\'92ve found grace! All my youth and childhood I was glad of pigs\'92 food, but\
now even I have found grace. I am dying in the Lord.\'92 \'91Yes, Richard, die\
in the Lord; you have shed blood and must die. Though it\'92s not your fault\
that you knew not the Lord, when you coveted the pigs\'92 food and were\
beaten for stealing it (which was very wrong of you, for stealing is\
forbidden); but you\'92ve shed blood and you must die.\'92 And on the last day,\
Richard, perfectly limp, did nothing but cry and repeat every minute:\
\'91This is my happiest day. I am going to the Lord.\'92 \'91Yes,\'92 cry the pastors\
and the judges and philanthropic ladies. \'91This is the happiest day of your\
life, for you are going to the Lord!\'92 They all walk or drive to the\
scaffold in procession behind the prison van. At the scaffold they call to\
Richard: \'91Die, brother, die in the Lord, for even thou hast found grace!\'92\
And so, covered with his brothers\'92 kisses, Richard is dragged on to the\
scaffold, and led to the guillotine. And they chopped off his head in\
brotherly fashion, because he had found grace. Yes, that\'92s characteristic.\
That pamphlet is translated into Russian by some Russian philanthropists\
of aristocratic rank and evangelical aspirations, and has been distributed\
gratis for the enlightenment of the people. The case of Richard is\
interesting because it\'92s national. Though to us it\'92s absurd to cut off a\
man\'92s head, because he has become our brother and has found grace, yet we\
have our own speciality, which is all but worse. Our historical pastime is\
the direct satisfaction of inflicting pain. There are lines in Nekrassov\
describing how a peasant lashes a horse on the eyes, \'91on its meek eyes,\'92\
every one must have seen it. It\'92s peculiarly Russian. He describes how a\
feeble little nag has foundered under too heavy a load and cannot move.\
The peasant beats it, beats it savagely, beats it at last not knowing what\
he is doing in the intoxication of cruelty, thrashes it mercilessly over\
and over again. \'91However weak you are, you must pull, if you die for it.\'92\
The nag strains, and then he begins lashing the poor defenseless creature\
on its weeping, on its \'91meek eyes.\'92 The frantic beast tugs and draws the\
load, trembling all over, gasping for breath, moving sideways, with a sort\
of unnatural spasmodic action\'97it\'92s awful in Nekrassov. But that\'92s only a\
horse, and God has given horses to be beaten. So the Tatars have taught\
us, and they left us the knout as a remembrance of it. But men, too, can\
be beaten. A well\uc0\u8208 educated, cultured gentleman and his wife beat their own\
child with a birch\uc0\u8208 rod, a girl of seven. I have an exact account of it.\
The papa was glad that the birch was covered with twigs. \'91It stings more,\'92\
said he, and so he began stinging his daughter. I know for a fact there\
are people who at every blow are worked up to sensuality, to literal\
sensuality, which increases progressively at every blow they inflict. They\
beat for a minute, for five minutes, for ten minutes, more often and more\
savagely. The child screams. At last the child cannot scream, it gasps,\
\'91Daddy! daddy!\'92 By some diabolical unseemly chance the case was brought\
into court. A counsel is engaged. The Russian people have long called a\
barrister \'91a conscience for hire.\'92 The counsel protests in his client\'92s\
defense. \'91It\'92s such a simple thing,\'92 he says, \'91an everyday domestic event.\
A father corrects his child. To our shame be it said, it is brought into\
court.\'92 The jury, convinced by him, give a favorable verdict. The public\
roars with delight that the torturer is acquitted. Ah, pity I wasn\'92t\
there! I would have proposed to raise a subscription in his honor!\
Charming pictures.\
\
\'93But I\'92ve still better things about children. I\'92ve collected a great,\
great deal about Russian children, Alyosha. There was a little girl of\
five who was hated by her father and mother, \'91most worthy and respectable\
people, of good education and breeding.\'92 You see, I must repeat again, it\
is a peculiar characteristic of many people, this love of torturing\
children, and children only. To all other types of humanity these\
torturers behave mildly and benevolently, like cultivated and humane\
Europeans; but they are very fond of tormenting children, even fond of\
children themselves in that sense. It\'92s just their defenselessness that\
tempts the tormentor, just the angelic confidence of the child who has no\
refuge and no appeal, that sets his vile blood on fire. In every man, of\
course, a demon lies hidden\'97the demon of rage, the demon of lustful heat\
at the screams of the tortured victim, the demon of lawlessness let off\
the chain, the demon of diseases that follow on vice, gout, kidney\
disease, and so on.\
\
\'93This poor child of five was subjected to every possible torture by those\
cultivated parents. They beat her, thrashed her, kicked her for no reason\
till her body was one bruise. Then, they went to greater refinements of\
cruelty\'97shut her up all night in the cold and frost in a privy, and\
because she didn\'92t ask to be taken up at night (as though a child of five\
sleeping its angelic, sound sleep could be trained to wake and ask), they\
smeared her face and filled her mouth with excrement, and it was her\
mother, her mother did this. And that mother could sleep, hearing the poor\
child\'92s groans! Can you understand why a little creature, who can\'92t even\
understand what\'92s done to her, should beat her little aching heart with\
her tiny fist in the dark and the cold, and weep her meek unresentful\
tears to dear, kind God to protect her? Do you understand that, friend and\
brother, you pious and humble novice? Do you understand why this infamy\
must be and is permitted? Without it, I am told, man could not have\
existed on earth, for he could not have known good and evil. Why should he\
know that diabolical good and evil when it costs so much? Why, the whole\
world of knowledge is not worth that child\'92s prayer to \'91dear, kind God\'92! I\
say nothing of the sufferings of grown\uc0\u8208 up people, they have eaten the\
apple, damn them, and the devil take them all! But these little ones! I am\
making you suffer, Alyosha, you are not yourself. I\'92ll leave off if you\
like.\'94\
\
\'93Never mind. I want to suffer too,\'94 muttered Alyosha.\
\
\'93One picture, only one more, because it\'92s so curious, so characteristic,\
and I have only just read it in some collection of Russian antiquities.\
I\'92ve forgotten the name. I must look it up. It was in the darkest days of\
serfdom at the beginning of the century, and long live the Liberator of\
the People! There was in those days a general of aristocratic connections,\
the owner of great estates, one of those men\'97somewhat exceptional, I\
believe, even then\'97who, retiring from the service into a life of leisure,\
are convinced that they\'92ve earned absolute power over the lives of their\
subjects. There were such men then. So our general, settled on his\
property of two thousand souls, lives in pomp, and domineers over his poor\
neighbors as though they were dependents and buffoons. He has kennels of\
hundreds of hounds and nearly a hundred dog\uc0\u8208 boys\'97all mounted, and in\
uniform. One day a serf\uc0\u8208 boy, a little child of eight, threw a stone in\
play and hurt the paw of the general\'92s favorite hound. \'91Why is my favorite\
dog lame?\'92 He is told that the boy threw a stone that hurt the dog\'92s paw.\
\'91So you did it.\'92 The general looked the child up and down. \'91Take him.\'92 He\
was taken\'97taken from his mother and kept shut up all night. Early that\
morning the general comes out on horseback, with the hounds, his\
dependents, dog\uc0\u8208 boys, and huntsmen, all mounted around him in full hunting\
parade. The servants are summoned for their edification, and in front of\
them all stands the mother of the child. The child is brought from the\
lock\uc0\u8208 up. It\'92s a gloomy, cold, foggy autumn day, a capital day for hunting.\
The general orders the child to be undressed; the child is stripped naked.\
He shivers, numb with terror, not daring to cry.... \'91Make him run,\'92\
commands the general. \'91Run! run!\'92 shout the dog\uc0\u8208 boys. The boy runs.... \'91At\
him!\'92 yells the general, and he sets the whole pack of hounds on the\
child. The hounds catch him, and tear him to pieces before his mother\'92s\
eyes!... I believe the general was afterwards declared incapable of\
administering his estates. Well\'97what did he deserve? To be shot? To be\
shot for the satisfaction of our moral feelings? Speak, Alyosha!\'94\
\
\'93To be shot,\'94 murmured Alyosha, lifting his eyes to Ivan with a pale,\
twisted smile.\
\
\'93Bravo!\'94 cried Ivan, delighted. \'93If even you say so.... You\'92re a pretty\
monk! So there is a little devil sitting in your heart, Alyosha\
Karamazov!\'94\
\
\'93What I said was absurd, but\'97\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s just the point, that \'91but\'92!\'94 cried Ivan. \'93Let me tell you, novice,\
that the absurd is only too necessary on earth. The world stands on\
absurdities, and perhaps nothing would have come to pass in it without\
them. We know what we know!\'94\
\
\'93What do you know?\'94\
\
\'93I understand nothing,\'94 Ivan went on, as though in delirium. \'93I don\'92t want\
to understand anything now. I want to stick to the fact. I made up my mind\
long ago not to understand. If I try to understand anything, I shall be\
false to the fact, and I have determined to stick to the fact.\'94\
\
\'93Why are you trying me?\'94 Alyosha cried, with sudden distress. \'93Will you\
say what you mean at last?\'94\
\
\'93Of course, I will; that\'92s what I\'92ve been leading up to. You are dear to\
me, I don\'92t want to let you go, and I won\'92t give you up to your Zossima.\'94\
\
Ivan for a minute was silent, his face became all at once very sad.\
\
\'93Listen! I took the case of children only to make my case clearer. Of the\
other tears of humanity with which the earth is soaked from its crust to\
its center, I will say nothing. I have narrowed my subject on purpose. I\
am a bug, and I recognize in all humility that I cannot understand why the\
world is arranged as it is. Men are themselves to blame, I suppose; they\
were given paradise, they wanted freedom, and stole fire from heaven,\
though they knew they would become unhappy, so there is no need to pity\
them. With my pitiful, earthly, Euclidian understanding, all I know is\
that there is suffering and that there are none guilty; that cause follows\
effect, simply and directly; that everything flows and finds its level\'97but\
that\'92s only Euclidian nonsense, I know that, and I can\'92t consent to live\
by it! What comfort is it to me that there are none guilty and that cause\
follows effect simply and directly, and that I know it?\'97I must have\
justice, or I will destroy myself. And not justice in some remote infinite\
time and space, but here on earth, and that I could see myself. I have\
believed in it. I want to see it, and if I am dead by then, let me rise\
again, for if it all happens without me, it will be too unfair. Surely I\
haven\'92t suffered, simply that I, my crimes and my sufferings, may manure\
the soil of the future harmony for somebody else. I want to see with my\
own eyes the hind lie down with the lion and the victim rise up and\
embrace his murderer. I want to be there when every one suddenly\
understands what it has all been for. All the religions of the world are\
built on this longing, and I am a believer. But then there are the\
children, and what am I to do about them? That\'92s a question I can\'92t\
answer. For the hundredth time I repeat, there are numbers of questions,\
but I\'92ve only taken the children, because in their case what I mean is so\
unanswerably clear. Listen! If all must suffer to pay for the eternal\
harmony, what have children to do with it, tell me, please? It\'92s beyond\
all comprehension why they should suffer, and why they should pay for the\
harmony. Why should they, too, furnish material to enrich the soil for the\
harmony of the future? I understand solidarity in sin among men. I\
understand solidarity in retribution, too; but there can be no such\
solidarity with children. And if it is really true that they must share\
responsibility for all their fathers\'92 crimes, such a truth is not of this\
world and is beyond my comprehension. Some jester will say, perhaps, that\
the child would have grown up and have sinned, but you see he didn\'92t grow\
up, he was torn to pieces by the dogs, at eight years old. Oh, Alyosha, I\
am not blaspheming! I understand, of course, what an upheaval of the\
universe it will be, when everything in heaven and earth blends in one\
hymn of praise and everything that lives and has lived cries aloud: \'91Thou\
art just, O Lord, for Thy ways are revealed.\'92 When the mother embraces the\
fiend who threw her child to the dogs, and all three cry aloud with tears,\
\'91Thou art just, O Lord!\'92 then, of course, the crown of knowledge will be\
reached and all will be made clear. But what pulls me up here is that I\
can\'92t accept that harmony. And while I am on earth, I make haste to take\
my own measures. You see, Alyosha, perhaps it really may happen that if I\
live to that moment, or rise again to see it, I, too, perhaps, may cry\
aloud with the rest, looking at the mother embracing the child\'92s torturer,\
\'91Thou art just, O Lord!\'92 but I don\'92t want to cry aloud then. While there\
is still time, I hasten to protect myself, and so I renounce the higher\
harmony altogether. It\'92s not worth the tears of that one tortured child\
who beat itself on the breast with its little fist and prayed in its\
stinking outhouse, with its unexpiated tears to \'91dear, kind God\'92! It\'92s not\
worth it, because those tears are unatoned for. They must be atoned for,\
or there can be no harmony. But how? How are you going to atone for them?\
Is it possible? By their being avenged? But what do I care for avenging\
them? What do I care for a hell for oppressors? What good can hell do,\
since those children have already been tortured? And what becomes of\
harmony, if there is hell? I want to forgive. I want to embrace. I don\'92t\
want more suffering. And if the sufferings of children go to swell the sum\
of sufferings which was necessary to pay for truth, then I protest that\
the truth is not worth such a price. I don\'92t want the mother to embrace\
the oppressor who threw her son to the dogs! She dare not forgive him! Let\
her forgive him for herself, if she will, let her forgive the torturer for\
the immeasurable suffering of her mother\'92s heart. But the sufferings of\
her tortured child she has no right to forgive; she dare not forgive the\
torturer, even if the child were to forgive him! And if that is so, if\
they dare not forgive, what becomes of harmony? Is there in the whole\
world a being who would have the right to forgive and could forgive? I\
don\'92t want harmony. From love for humanity I don\'92t want it. I would rather\
be left with the unavenged suffering. I would rather remain with my\
unavenged suffering and unsatisfied indignation, _even if I were wrong_.\
Besides, too high a price is asked for harmony; it\'92s beyond our means to\
pay so much to enter on it. And so I hasten to give back my entrance\
ticket, and if I am an honest man I am bound to give it back as soon as\
possible. And that I am doing. It\'92s not God that I don\'92t accept, Alyosha,\
only I most respectfully return Him the ticket.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s rebellion,\'94 murmured Alyosha, looking down.\
\
\'93Rebellion? I am sorry you call it that,\'94 said Ivan earnestly. \'93One can\
hardly live in rebellion, and I want to live. Tell me yourself, I\
challenge you\'97answer. Imagine that you are creating a fabric of human\
destiny with the object of making men happy in the end, giving them peace\
and rest at last, but that it was essential and inevitable to torture to\
death only one tiny creature\'97that baby beating its breast with its fist,\
for instance\'97and to found that edifice on its unavenged tears, would you\
consent to be the architect on those conditions? Tell me, and tell the\
truth.\'94\
\
\'93No, I wouldn\'92t consent,\'94 said Alyosha softly.\
\
\'93And can you admit the idea that men for whom you are building it would\
agree to accept their happiness on the foundation of the unexpiated blood\
of a little victim? And accepting it would remain happy for ever?\'94\
\
\'93No, I can\'92t admit it. Brother,\'94 said Alyosha suddenly, with flashing\
eyes, \'93you said just now, is there a being in the whole world who would\
have the right to forgive and could forgive? But there is a Being and He\
can forgive everything, all and for all, because He gave His innocent\
blood for all and everything. You have forgotten Him, and on Him is built\
the edifice, and it is to Him they cry aloud, \'91Thou art just, O Lord, for\
Thy ways are revealed!\'92 \'94\
\
\'93Ah! the One without sin and His blood! No, I have not forgotten Him; on\
the contrary I\'92ve been wondering all the time how it was you did not bring\
Him in before, for usually all arguments on your side put Him in the\
foreground. Do you know, Alyosha\'97don\'92t laugh! I made a poem about a year\
ago. If you can waste another ten minutes on me, I\'92ll tell it to you.\'94\
\
\'93You wrote a poem?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no, I didn\'92t write it,\'94 laughed Ivan, \'93and I\'92ve never written two\
lines of poetry in my life. But I made up this poem in prose and I\
remembered it. I was carried away when I made it up. You will be my first\
reader\'97that is listener. Why should an author forego even one listener?\'94\
smiled Ivan. \'93Shall I tell it to you?\'94\
\
\'93I am all attention,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93My poem is called \'91The Grand Inquisitor\'92; it\'92s a ridiculous thing, but I\
want to tell it to you.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter V. The Grand Inquisitor\
\
\
\'93Even this must have a preface\'97that is, a literary preface,\'94 laughed Ivan,\
\'93and I am a poor hand at making one. You see, my action takes place in the\
sixteenth century, and at that time, as you probably learnt at school, it\
was customary in poetry to bring down heavenly powers on earth. Not to\
speak of Dante, in France, clerks, as well as the monks in the\
monasteries, used to give regular performances in which the Madonna, the\
saints, the angels, Christ, and God himself were brought on the stage. In\
those days it was done in all simplicity. In Victor Hugo\'92s _Notre Dame de\
Paris_ an edifying and gratuitous spectacle was provided for the people in\
the H\'f4tel de Ville of Paris in the reign of Louis XI. in honor of the\
birth of the dauphin. It was called _Le bon jugement de la tr\'e8s sainte et\
gracieuse Vierge Marie_, and she appears herself on the stage and\
pronounces her _bon jugement_. Similar plays, chiefly from the Old\
Testament, were occasionally performed in Moscow too, up to the times of\
Peter the Great. But besides plays there were all sorts of legends and\
ballads scattered about the world, in which the saints and angels and all\
the powers of Heaven took part when required. In our monasteries the monks\
busied themselves in translating, copying, and even composing such\
poems\'97and even under the Tatars. There is, for instance, one such poem (of\
course, from the Greek), _The Wanderings of Our Lady through Hell_, with\
descriptions as bold as Dante\'92s. Our Lady visits hell, and the Archangel\
Michael leads her through the torments. She sees the sinners and their\
punishment. There she sees among others one noteworthy set of sinners in a\
burning lake; some of them sink to the bottom of the lake so that they\
can\'92t swim out, and \'91these God forgets\'92\'97an expression of extraordinary\
depth and force. And so Our Lady, shocked and weeping, falls before the\
throne of God and begs for mercy for all in hell\'97for all she has seen\
there, indiscriminately. Her conversation with God is immensely\
interesting. She beseeches Him, she will not desist, and when God points\
to the hands and feet of her Son, nailed to the Cross, and asks, \'91How can\
I forgive His tormentors?\'92 she bids all the saints, all the martyrs, all\
the angels and archangels to fall down with her and pray for mercy on all\
without distinction. It ends by her winning from God a respite of\
suffering every year from Good Friday till Trinity Day, and the sinners at\
once raise a cry of thankfulness from hell, chanting, \'91Thou art just, O\
Lord, in this judgment.\'92 Well, my poem would have been of that kind if it\
had appeared at that time. He comes on the scene in my poem, but He says\
nothing, only appears and passes on. Fifteen centuries have passed since\
He promised to come in His glory, fifteen centuries since His prophet\
wrote, \'91Behold, I come quickly\'92; \'91Of that day and that hour knoweth no\
man, neither the Son, but the Father,\'92 as He Himself predicted on earth.\
But humanity awaits him with the same faith and with the same love. Oh,\
with greater faith, for it is fifteen centuries since man has ceased to\
see signs from heaven.\
\
\
    No signs from heaven come to\uc0\u8208 day\
    To add to what the heart doth say.\
\
\
There was nothing left but faith in what the heart doth say. It is true\
there were many miracles in those days. There were saints who performed\
miraculous cures; some holy people, according to their biographies, were\
visited by the Queen of Heaven herself. But the devil did not slumber, and\
doubts were already arising among men of the truth of these miracles. And\
just then there appeared in the north of Germany a terrible new heresy. \'93A\
huge star like to a torch\'94 (that is, to a church) \'93fell on the sources of\
the waters and they became bitter.\'94 These heretics began blasphemously\
denying miracles. But those who remained faithful were all the more ardent\
in their faith. The tears of humanity rose up to Him as before, awaited\
His coming, loved Him, hoped for Him, yearned to suffer and die for Him as\
before. And so many ages mankind had prayed with faith and fervor, \'93O Lord\
our God, hasten Thy coming,\'94 so many ages called upon Him, that in His\
infinite mercy He deigned to come down to His servants. Before that day He\
had come down, He had visited some holy men, martyrs and hermits, as is\
written in their lives. Among us, Tyutchev, with absolute faith in the\
truth of his words, bore witness that\
\
\
    Bearing the Cross, in slavish dress,\
    Weary and worn, the Heavenly King\
    Our mother, Russia, came to bless,\
    And through our land went wandering.\
\
\
And that certainly was so, I assure you.\
\
\'93And behold, He deigned to appear for a moment to the people, to the\
tortured, suffering people, sunk in iniquity, but loving Him like\
children. My story is laid in Spain, in Seville, in the most terrible time\
of the Inquisition, when fires were lighted every day to the glory of God,\
and \'91in the splendid _auto da f\'e9_ the wicked heretics were burnt.\'92 Oh, of\
course, this was not the coming in which He will appear according to His\
promise at the end of time in all His heavenly glory, and which will be\
sudden \'91as lightning flashing from east to west.\'92 No, He visited His\
children only for a moment, and there where the flames were crackling\
round the heretics. In His infinite mercy He came once more among men in\
that human shape in which He walked among men for three years fifteen\
centuries ago. He came down to the \'91hot pavements\'92 of the southern town in\
which on the day before almost a hundred heretics had, _ad majorem gloriam\
Dei_, been burnt by the cardinal, the Grand Inquisitor, in a magnificent\
_auto da f\'e9_, in the presence of the king, the court, the knights, the\
cardinals, the most charming ladies of the court, and the whole population\
of Seville.\
\
\'93He came softly, unobserved, and yet, strange to say, every one recognized\
Him. That might be one of the best passages in the poem. I mean, why they\
recognized Him. The people are irresistibly drawn to Him, they surround\
Him, they flock about Him, follow Him. He moves silently in their midst\
with a gentle smile of infinite compassion. The sun of love burns in His\
heart, light and power shine from His eyes, and their radiance, shed on\
the people, stirs their hearts with responsive love. He holds out His\
hands to them, blesses them, and a healing virtue comes from contact with\
Him, even with His garments. An old man in the crowd, blind from\
childhood, cries out, \'91O Lord, heal me and I shall see Thee!\'92 and, as it\
were, scales fall from his eyes and the blind man sees Him. The crowd\
weeps and kisses the earth under His feet. Children throw flowers before\
Him, sing, and cry hosannah. \'91It is He\'97it is He!\'92 all repeat. \'91It must be\
He, it can be no one but Him!\'92 He stops at the steps of the Seville\
cathedral at the moment when the weeping mourners are bringing in a little\
open white coffin. In it lies a child of seven, the only daughter of a\
prominent citizen. The dead child lies hidden in flowers. \'91He will raise\
your child,\'92 the crowd shouts to the weeping mother. The priest, coming to\
meet the coffin, looks perplexed, and frowns, but the mother of the dead\
child throws herself at His feet with a wail. \'91If it is Thou, raise my\
child!\'92 she cries, holding out her hands to Him. The procession halts, the\
coffin is laid on the steps at His feet. He looks with compassion, and His\
lips once more softly pronounce, \'91Maiden, arise!\'92 and the maiden arises.\
The little girl sits up in the coffin and looks round, smiling with wide\uc0\u8208 \
open wondering eyes, holding a bunch of white roses they had put in her\
hand.\
\
\'93There are cries, sobs, confusion among the people, and at that moment the\
cardinal himself, the Grand Inquisitor, passes by the cathedral. He is an\
old man, almost ninety, tall and erect, with a withered face and sunken\
eyes, in which there is still a gleam of light. He is not dressed in his\
gorgeous cardinal\'92s robes, as he was the day before, when he was burning\
the enemies of the Roman Church\'97at this moment he is wearing his coarse,\
old, monk\'92s cassock. At a distance behind him come his gloomy assistants\
and slaves and the \'91holy guard.\'92 He stops at the sight of the crowd and\
watches it from a distance. He sees everything; he sees them set the\
coffin down at His feet, sees the child rise up, and his face darkens. He\
knits his thick gray brows and his eyes gleam with a sinister fire. He\
holds out his finger and bids the guards take Him. And such is his power,\
so completely are the people cowed into submission and trembling obedience\
to him, that the crowd immediately makes way for the guards, and in the\
midst of deathlike silence they lay hands on Him and lead Him away. The\
crowd instantly bows down to the earth, like one man, before the old\
Inquisitor. He blesses the people in silence and passes on. The guards\
lead their prisoner to the close, gloomy vaulted prison in the ancient\
palace of the Holy Inquisition and shut Him in it. The day passes and is\
followed by the dark, burning, \'91breathless\'92 night of Seville. The air is\
\'91fragrant with laurel and lemon.\'92 In the pitch darkness the iron door of\
the prison is suddenly opened and the Grand Inquisitor himself comes in\
with a light in his hand. He is alone; the door is closed at once behind\
him. He stands in the doorway and for a minute or two gazes into His face.\
At last he goes up slowly, sets the light on the table and speaks.\
\
\'93 \'91Is it Thou? Thou?\'92 but receiving no answer, he adds at once, \'91Don\'92t\
answer, be silent. What canst Thou say, indeed? I know too well what Thou\
wouldst say. And Thou hast no right to add anything to what Thou hadst\
said of old. Why, then, art Thou come to hinder us? For Thou hast come to\
hinder us, and Thou knowest that. But dost Thou know what will be to\uc0\u8208 \
morrow? I know not who Thou art and care not to know whether it is Thou or\
only a semblance of Him, but to\uc0\u8208 morrow I shall condemn Thee and burn Thee\
at the stake as the worst of heretics. And the very people who have to\uc0\u8208 day\
kissed Thy feet, to\uc0\u8208 morrow at the faintest sign from me will rush to heap\
up the embers of Thy fire. Knowest Thou that? Yes, maybe Thou knowest it,\'92\
he added with thoughtful penetration, never for a moment taking his eyes\
off the Prisoner.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t quite understand, Ivan. What does it mean?\'94 Alyosha, who had been\
listening in silence, said with a smile. \'93Is it simply a wild fantasy, or\
a mistake on the part of the old man\'97some impossible _quiproquo_?\'94\
\
\'93Take it as the last,\'94 said Ivan, laughing, \'93if you are so corrupted by\
modern realism and can\'92t stand anything fantastic. If you like it to be a\
case of mistaken identity, let it be so. It is true,\'94 he went on,\
laughing, \'93the old man was ninety, and he might well be crazy over his set\
idea. He might have been struck by the appearance of the Prisoner. It\
might, in fact, be simply his ravings, the delusion of an old man of\
ninety, over\uc0\u8208 excited by the _auto da f\'e9_ of a hundred heretics the day\
before. But does it matter to us after all whether it was a mistake of\
identity or a wild fantasy? All that matters is that the old man should\
speak out, should speak openly of what he has thought in silence for\
ninety years.\'94\
\
\'93And the Prisoner too is silent? Does He look at him and not say a word?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s inevitable in any case,\'94 Ivan laughed again. \'93The old man has told\
Him He hasn\'92t the right to add anything to what He has said of old. One\
may say it is the most fundamental feature of Roman Catholicism, in my\
opinion at least. \'91All has been given by Thee to the Pope,\'92 they say, \'91and\
all, therefore, is still in the Pope\'92s hands, and there is no need for\
Thee to come now at all. Thou must not meddle for the time, at least.\'92\
That\'92s how they speak and write too\'97the Jesuits, at any rate. I have read\
it myself in the works of their theologians. \'91Hast Thou the right to\
reveal to us one of the mysteries of that world from which Thou hast\
come?\'92 my old man asks Him, and answers the question for Him. \'91No, Thou\
hast not; that Thou mayest not add to what has been said of old, and\
mayest not take from men the freedom which Thou didst exalt when Thou wast\
on earth. Whatsoever Thou revealest anew will encroach on men\'92s freedom of\
faith; for it will be manifest as a miracle, and the freedom of their\
faith was dearer to Thee than anything in those days fifteen hundred years\
ago. Didst Thou not often say then, \'93I will make you free\'94? But now Thou\
hast seen these \'93free\'94 men,\'92 the old man adds suddenly, with a pensive\
smile. \'91Yes, we\'92ve paid dearly for it,\'92 he goes on, looking sternly at\
Him, \'91but at last we have completed that work in Thy name. For fifteen\
centuries we have been wrestling with Thy freedom, but now it is ended and\
over for good. Dost Thou not believe that it\'92s over for good? Thou lookest\
meekly at me and deignest not even to be wroth with me. But let me tell\
Thee that now, to\uc0\u8208 day, people are more persuaded than ever that they have\
perfect freedom, yet they have brought their freedom to us and laid it\
humbly at our feet. But that has been our doing. Was this what Thou didst?\
Was this Thy freedom?\'92 \'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t understand again,\'94 Alyosha broke in. \'93Is he ironical, is he\
jesting?\'94\
\
\'93Not a bit of it! He claims it as a merit for himself and his Church that\
at last they have vanquished freedom and have done so to make men happy.\
\'91For now\'92 (he is speaking of the Inquisition, of course) \'91for the first\
time it has become possible to think of the happiness of men. Man was\
created a rebel; and how can rebels be happy? Thou wast warned,\'92 he says\
to Him. \'91Thou hast had no lack of admonitions and warnings, but Thou didst\
not listen to those warnings; Thou didst reject the only way by which men\
might be made happy. But, fortunately, departing Thou didst hand on the\
work to us. Thou hast promised, Thou hast established by Thy word, Thou\
hast given to us the right to bind and to unbind, and now, of course, Thou\
canst not think of taking it away. Why, then, hast Thou come to hinder\
us?\'92 \'94\
\
\'93And what\'92s the meaning of \'91no lack of admonitions and warnings\'92?\'94 asked\
Alyosha.\
\
\'93Why, that\'92s the chief part of what the old man must say.\
\
\'93 \'91The wise and dread spirit, the spirit of self\uc0\u8208 destruction and non\u8208 \
existence,\'92 the old man goes on, \'91the great spirit talked with Thee in the\
wilderness, and we are told in the books that he \'93tempted\'94 Thee. Is that\
so? And could anything truer be said than what he revealed to Thee in\
three questions and what Thou didst reject, and what in the books is\
called \'93the temptation\'94? And yet if there has ever been on earth a real\
stupendous miracle, it took place on that day, on the day of the three\
temptations. The statement of those three questions was itself the\
miracle. If it were possible to imagine simply for the sake of argument\
that those three questions of the dread spirit had perished utterly from\
the books, and that we had to restore them and to invent them anew, and to\
do so had gathered together all the wise men of the earth\'97rulers, chief\
priests, learned men, philosophers, poets\'97and had set them the task to\
invent three questions, such as would not only fit the occasion, but\
express in three words, three human phrases, the whole future history of\
the world and of humanity\'97dost Thou believe that all the wisdom of the\
earth united could have invented anything in depth and force equal to the\
three questions which were actually put to Thee then by the wise and\
mighty spirit in the wilderness? From those questions alone, from the\
miracle of their statement, we can see that we have here to do not with\
the fleeting human intelligence, but with the absolute and eternal. For in\
those three questions the whole subsequent history of mankind is, as it\
were, brought together into one whole, and foretold, and in them are\
united all the unsolved historical contradictions of human nature. At the\
time it could not be so clear, since the future was unknown; but now that\
fifteen hundred years have passed, we see that everything in those three\
questions was so justly divined and foretold, and has been so truly\
fulfilled, that nothing can be added to them or taken from them.\
\
\'93 \'91Judge Thyself who was right\'97Thou or he who questioned Thee then?\
Remember the first question; its meaning, in other words, was this: \'93Thou\
wouldst go into the world, and art going with empty hands, with some\
promise of freedom which men in their simplicity and their natural\
unruliness cannot even understand, which they fear and dread\'97for nothing\
has ever been more insupportable for a man and a human society than\
freedom. But seest Thou these stones in this parched and barren\
wilderness? Turn them into bread, and mankind will run after Thee like a\
flock of sheep, grateful and obedient, though for ever trembling, lest\
Thou withdraw Thy hand and deny them Thy bread.\'94 But Thou wouldst not\
deprive man of freedom and didst reject the offer, thinking, what is that\
freedom worth, if obedience is bought with bread? Thou didst reply that\
man lives not by bread alone. But dost Thou know that for the sake of that\
earthly bread the spirit of the earth will rise up against Thee and will\
strive with Thee and overcome Thee, and all will follow him, crying, \'93Who\
can compare with this beast? He has given us fire from heaven!\'94 Dost Thou\
know that the ages will pass, and humanity will proclaim by the lips of\
their sages that there is no crime, and therefore no sin; there is only\
hunger? \'93Feed men, and then ask of them virtue!\'94 that\'92s what they\'92ll write\
on the banner, which they will raise against Thee, and with which they\
will destroy Thy temple. Where Thy temple stood will rise a new building;\
the terrible tower of Babel will be built again, and though, like the one\
of old, it will not be finished, yet Thou mightest have prevented that new\
tower and have cut short the sufferings of men for a thousand years; for\
they will come back to us after a thousand years of agony with their\
tower. They will seek us again, hidden underground in the catacombs, for\
we shall be again persecuted and tortured. They will find us and cry to\
us, \'93Feed us, for those who have promised us fire from heaven haven\'92t\
given it!\'94 And then we shall finish building their tower, for he finishes\
the building who feeds them. And we alone shall feed them in Thy name,\
declaring falsely that it is in Thy name. Oh, never, never can they feed\
themselves without us! No science will give them bread so long as they\
remain free. In the end they will lay their freedom at our feet, and say\
to us, \'93Make us your slaves, but feed us.\'94 They will understand\
themselves, at last, that freedom and bread enough for all are\
inconceivable together, for never, never will they be able to share\
between them! They will be convinced, too, that they can never be free,\
for they are weak, vicious, worthless and rebellious. Thou didst promise\
them the bread of Heaven, but, I repeat again, can it compare with earthly\
bread in the eyes of the weak, ever sinful and ignoble race of man? And if\
for the sake of the bread of Heaven thousands shall follow Thee, what is\
to become of the millions and tens of thousands of millions of creatures\
who will not have the strength to forego the earthly bread for the sake of\
the heavenly? Or dost Thou care only for the tens of thousands of the\
great and strong, while the millions, numerous as the sands of the sea,\
who are weak but love Thee, must exist only for the sake of the great and\
strong? No, we care for the weak too. They are sinful and rebellious, but\
in the end they too will become obedient. They will marvel at us and look\
on us as gods, because we are ready to endure the freedom which they have\
found so dreadful and to rule over them\'97so awful it will seem to them to\
be free. But we shall tell them that we are Thy servants and rule them in\
Thy name. We shall deceive them again, for we will not let Thee come to us\
again. That deception will be our suffering, for we shall be forced to\
lie.\
\
\'93 \'91This is the significance of the first question in the wilderness, and\
this is what Thou hast rejected for the sake of that freedom which Thou\
hast exalted above everything. Yet in this question lies hid the great\
secret of this world. Choosing \'93bread,\'94 Thou wouldst have satisfied the\
universal and everlasting craving of humanity\'97to find some one to worship.\
So long as man remains free he strives for nothing so incessantly and so\
painfully as to find some one to worship. But man seeks to worship what is\
established beyond dispute, so that all men would agree at once to worship\
it. For these pitiful creatures are concerned not only to find what one or\
the other can worship, but to find something that all would believe in and\
worship; what is essential is that all may be _together_ in it. This\
craving for _community_ of worship is the chief misery of every man\
individually and of all humanity from the beginning of time. For the sake\
of common worship they\'92ve slain each other with the sword. They have set\
up gods and challenged one another, \'93Put away your gods and come and\
worship ours, or we will kill you and your gods!\'94 And so it will be to the\
end of the world, even when gods disappear from the earth; they will fall\
down before idols just the same. Thou didst know, Thou couldst not but\
have known, this fundamental secret of human nature, but Thou didst reject\
the one infallible banner which was offered Thee to make all men bow down\
to Thee alone\'97the banner of earthly bread; and Thou hast rejected it for\
the sake of freedom and the bread of Heaven. Behold what Thou didst\
further. And all again in the name of freedom! I tell Thee that man is\
tormented by no greater anxiety than to find some one quickly to whom he\
can hand over that gift of freedom with which the ill\uc0\u8208 fated creature is\
born. But only one who can appease their conscience can take over their\
freedom. In bread there was offered Thee an invincible banner; give bread,\
and man will worship thee, for nothing is more certain than bread. But if\
some one else gains possession of his conscience\'97oh! then he will cast\
away Thy bread and follow after him who has ensnared his conscience. In\
that Thou wast right. For the secret of man\'92s being is not only to live\
but to have something to live for. Without a stable conception of the\
object of life, man would not consent to go on living, and would rather\
destroy himself than remain on earth, though he had bread in abundance.\
That is true. But what happened? Instead of taking men\'92s freedom from\
them, Thou didst make it greater than ever! Didst Thou forget that man\
prefers peace, and even death, to freedom of choice in the knowledge of\
good and evil? Nothing is more seductive for man than his freedom of\
conscience, but nothing is a greater cause of suffering. And behold,\
instead of giving a firm foundation for setting the conscience of man at\
rest for ever, Thou didst choose all that is exceptional, vague and\
enigmatic; Thou didst choose what was utterly beyond the strength of men,\
acting as though Thou didst not love them at all\'97Thou who didst come to\
give Thy life for them! Instead of taking possession of men\'92s freedom,\
Thou didst increase it, and burdened the spiritual kingdom of mankind with\
its sufferings for ever. Thou didst desire man\'92s free love, that he should\
follow Thee freely, enticed and taken captive by Thee. In place of the\
rigid ancient law, man must hereafter with free heart decide for himself\
what is good and what is evil, having only Thy image before him as his\
guide. But didst Thou not know that he would at last reject even Thy image\
and Thy truth, if he is weighed down with the fearful burden of free\
choice? They will cry aloud at last that the truth is not in Thee, for\
they could not have been left in greater confusion and suffering than Thou\
hast caused, laying upon them so many cares and unanswerable problems.\
\
\'93 \'91So that, in truth, Thou didst Thyself lay the foundation for the\
destruction of Thy kingdom, and no one is more to blame for it. Yet what\
was offered Thee? There are three powers, three powers alone, able to\
conquer and to hold captive for ever the conscience of these impotent\
rebels for their happiness\'97those forces are miracle, mystery and\
authority. Thou hast rejected all three and hast set the example for doing\
so. When the wise and dread spirit set Thee on the pinnacle of the temple\
and said to Thee, \'93If Thou wouldst know whether Thou art the Son of God\
then cast Thyself down, for it is written: the angels shall hold him up\
lest he fall and bruise himself, and Thou shalt know then whether Thou art\
the Son of God and shalt prove then how great is Thy faith in Thy Father.\'94\
But Thou didst refuse and wouldst not cast Thyself down. Oh, of course,\
Thou didst proudly and well, like God; but the weak, unruly race of men,\
are they gods? Oh, Thou didst know then that in taking one step, in making\
one movement to cast Thyself down, Thou wouldst be tempting God and have\
lost all Thy faith in Him, and wouldst have been dashed to pieces against\
that earth which Thou didst come to save. And the wise spirit that tempted\
Thee would have rejoiced. But I ask again, are there many like Thee? And\
couldst Thou believe for one moment that men, too, could face such a\
temptation? Is the nature of men such, that they can reject miracle, and\
at the great moments of their life, the moments of their deepest, most\
agonizing spiritual difficulties, cling only to the free verdict of the\
heart? Oh, Thou didst know that Thy deed would be recorded in books, would\
be handed down to remote times and the utmost ends of the earth, and Thou\
didst hope that man, following Thee, would cling to God and not ask for a\
miracle. But Thou didst not know that when man rejects miracle he rejects\
God too; for man seeks not so much God as the miraculous. And as man\
cannot bear to be without the miraculous, he will create new miracles of\
his own for himself, and will worship deeds of sorcery and witchcraft,\
though he might be a hundred times over a rebel, heretic and infidel. Thou\
didst not come down from the Cross when they shouted to Thee, mocking and\
reviling Thee, \'93Come down from the cross and we will believe that Thou art\
He.\'94 Thou didst not come down, for again Thou wouldst not enslave man by a\
miracle, and didst crave faith given freely, not based on miracle. Thou\
didst crave for free love and not the base raptures of the slave before\
the might that has overawed him for ever. But Thou didst think too highly\
of men therein, for they are slaves, of course, though rebellious by\
nature. Look round and judge; fifteen centuries have passed, look upon\
them. Whom hast Thou raised up to Thyself? I swear, man is weaker and\
baser by nature than Thou hast believed him! Can he, can he do what Thou\
didst? By showing him so much respect, Thou didst, as it were, cease to\
feel for him, for Thou didst ask far too much from him\'97Thou who hast loved\
him more than Thyself! Respecting him less, Thou wouldst have asked less\
of him. That would have been more like love, for his burden would have\
been lighter. He is weak and vile. What though he is everywhere now\
rebelling against our power, and proud of his rebellion? It is the pride\
of a child and a schoolboy. They are little children rioting and barring\
out the teacher at school. But their childish delight will end; it will\
cost them dear. They will cast down temples and drench the earth with\
blood. But they will see at last, the foolish children, that, though they\
are rebels, they are impotent rebels, unable to keep up their own\
rebellion. Bathed in their foolish tears, they will recognize at last that\
He who created them rebels must have meant to mock at them. They will say\
this in despair, and their utterance will be a blasphemy which will make\
them more unhappy still, for man\'92s nature cannot bear blasphemy, and in\
the end always avenges it on itself. And so unrest, confusion and\
unhappiness\'97that is the present lot of man after Thou didst bear so much\
for their freedom! The great prophet tells in vision and in image, that he\
saw all those who took part in the first resurrection and that there were\
of each tribe twelve thousand. But if there were so many of them, they\
must have been not men but gods. They had borne Thy cross, they had\
endured scores of years in the barren, hungry wilderness, living upon\
locusts and roots\'97and Thou mayest indeed point with pride at those\
children of freedom, of free love, of free and splendid sacrifice for Thy\
name. But remember that they were only some thousands; and what of the\
rest? And how are the other weak ones to blame, because they could not\
endure what the strong have endured? How is the weak soul to blame that it\
is unable to receive such terrible gifts? Canst Thou have simply come to\
the elect and for the elect? But if so, it is a mystery and we cannot\
understand it. And if it is a mystery, we too have a right to preach a\
mystery, and to teach them that it\'92s not the free judgment of their\
hearts, not love that matters, but a mystery which they must follow\
blindly, even against their conscience. So we have done. We have corrected\
Thy work and have founded it upon _miracle_, _mystery_ and _authority_.\
And men rejoiced that they were again led like sheep, and that the\
terrible gift that had brought them such suffering was, at last, lifted\
from their hearts. Were we right teaching them this? Speak! Did we not\
love mankind, so meekly acknowledging their feebleness, lovingly\
lightening their burden, and permitting their weak nature even sin with\
our sanction? Why hast Thou come now to hinder us? And why dost Thou look\
silently and searchingly at me with Thy mild eyes? Be angry. I don\'92t want\
Thy love, for I love Thee not. And what use is it for me to hide anything\
from Thee? Don\'92t I know to Whom I am speaking? All that I can say is known\
to Thee already. And is it for me to conceal from Thee our mystery?\
Perhaps it is Thy will to hear it from my lips. Listen, then. We are not\
working with Thee, but with _him_\'97that is our mystery. It\'92s long\'97eight\
centuries\'97since we have been on _his_ side and not on Thine. Just eight\
centuries ago, we took from him what Thou didst reject with scorn, that\
last gift he offered Thee, showing Thee all the kingdoms of the earth. We\
took from him Rome and the sword of C\'e6sar, and proclaimed ourselves sole\
rulers of the earth, though hitherto we have not been able to complete our\
work. But whose fault is that? Oh, the work is only beginning, but it has\
begun. It has long to await completion and the earth has yet much to\
suffer, but we shall triumph and shall be C\'e6sars, and then we shall plan\
the universal happiness of man. But Thou mightest have taken even then the\
sword of C\'e6sar. Why didst Thou reject that last gift? Hadst Thou accepted\
that last counsel of the mighty spirit, Thou wouldst have accomplished all\
that man seeks on earth\'97that is, some one to worship, some one to keep his\
conscience, and some means of uniting all in one unanimous and harmonious\
ant\uc0\u8208 heap, for the craving for universal unity is the third and last\
anguish of men. Mankind as a whole has always striven to organize a\
universal state. There have been many great nations with great histories,\
but the more highly they were developed the more unhappy they were, for\
they felt more acutely than other people the craving for world\uc0\u8208 wide union.\
The great conquerors, Timours and Ghenghis\uc0\u8208 Khans, whirled like hurricanes\
over the face of the earth striving to subdue its people, and they too\
were but the unconscious expression of the same craving for universal\
unity. Hadst Thou taken the world and C\'e6sar\'92s purple, Thou wouldst have\
founded the universal state and have given universal peace. For who can\
rule men if not he who holds their conscience and their bread in his\
hands? We have taken the sword of C\'e6sar, and in taking it, of course, have\
rejected Thee and followed _him_. Oh, ages are yet to come of the\
confusion of free thought, of their science and cannibalism. For having\
begun to build their tower of Babel without us, they will end, of course,\
with cannibalism. But then the beast will crawl to us and lick our feet\
and spatter them with tears of blood. And we shall sit upon the beast and\
raise the cup, and on it will be written, \'93Mystery.\'94 But then, and only\
then, the reign of peace and happiness will come for men. Thou art proud\
of Thine elect, but Thou hast only the elect, while we give rest to all.\
And besides, how many of those elect, those mighty ones who could become\
elect, have grown weary waiting for Thee, and have transferred and will\
transfer the powers of their spirit and the warmth of their heart to the\
other camp, and end by raising their _free_ banner against Thee. Thou\
didst Thyself lift up that banner. But with us all will be happy and will\
no more rebel nor destroy one another as under Thy freedom. Oh, we shall\
persuade them that they will only become free when they renounce their\
freedom to us and submit to us. And shall we be right or shall we be\
lying? They will be convinced that we are right, for they will remember\
the horrors of slavery and confusion to which Thy freedom brought them.\
Freedom, free thought and science, will lead them into such straits and\
will bring them face to face with such marvels and insoluble mysteries,\
that some of them, the fierce and rebellious, will destroy themselves,\
others, rebellious but weak, will destroy one another, while the rest,\
weak and unhappy, will crawl fawning to our feet and whine to us: \'93Yes,\
you were right, you alone possess His mystery, and we come back to you,\
save us from ourselves!\'94\
\
\'93 \'91Receiving bread from us, they will see clearly that we take the bread\
made by their hands from them, to give it to them, without any miracle.\
They will see that we do not change the stones to bread, but in truth they\
will be more thankful for taking it from our hands than for the bread\
itself! For they will remember only too well that in old days, without our\
help, even the bread they made turned to stones in their hands, while\
since they have come back to us, the very stones have turned to bread in\
their hands. Too, too well will they know the value of complete\
submission! And until men know that, they will be unhappy. Who is most to\
blame for their not knowing it?\'97speak! Who scattered the flock and sent it\
astray on unknown paths? But the flock will come together again and will\
submit once more, and then it will be once for all. Then we shall give\
them the quiet humble happiness of weak creatures such as they are by\
nature. Oh, we shall persuade them at last not to be proud, for Thou didst\
lift them up and thereby taught them to be proud. We shall show them that\
they are weak, that they are only pitiful children, but that childlike\
happiness is the sweetest of all. They will become timid and will look to\
us and huddle close to us in fear, as chicks to the hen. They will marvel\
at us and will be awe\uc0\u8208 stricken before us, and will be proud at our being\
so powerful and clever, that we have been able to subdue such a turbulent\
flock of thousands of millions. They will tremble impotently before our\
wrath, their minds will grow fearful, they will be quick to shed tears\
like women and children, but they will be just as ready at a sign from us\
to pass to laughter and rejoicing, to happy mirth and childish song. Yes,\
we shall set them to work, but in their leisure hours we shall make their\
life like a child\'92s game, with children\'92s songs and innocent dance. Oh, we\
shall allow them even sin, they are weak and helpless, and they will love\
us like children because we allow them to sin. We shall tell them that\
every sin will be expiated, if it is done with our permission, that we\
allow them to sin because we love them, and the punishment for these sins\
we take upon ourselves. And we shall take it upon ourselves, and they will\
adore us as their saviors who have taken on themselves their sins before\
God. And they will have no secrets from us. We shall allow or forbid them\
to live with their wives and mistresses, to have or not to have\
children\'97according to whether they have been obedient or disobedient\'97and\
they will submit to us gladly and cheerfully. The most painful secrets of\
their conscience, all, all they will bring to us, and we shall have an\
answer for all. And they will be glad to believe our answer, for it will\
save them from the great anxiety and terrible agony they endure at present\
in making a free decision for themselves. And all will be happy, all the\
millions of creatures except the hundred thousand who rule over them. For\
only we, we who guard the mystery, shall be unhappy. There will be\
thousands of millions of happy babes, and a hundred thousand sufferers who\
have taken upon themselves the curse of the knowledge of good and evil.\
Peacefully they will die, peacefully they will expire in Thy name, and\
beyond the grave they will find nothing but death. But we shall keep the\
secret, and for their happiness we shall allure them with the reward of\
heaven and eternity. Though if there were anything in the other world, it\
certainly would not be for such as they. It is prophesied that Thou wilt\
come again in victory, Thou wilt come with Thy chosen, the proud and\
strong, but we will say that they have only saved themselves, but we have\
saved all. We are told that the harlot who sits upon the beast, and holds\
in her hands the _mystery_, shall be put to shame, that the weak will rise\
up again, and will rend her royal purple and will strip naked her\
loathsome body. But then I will stand up and point out to Thee the\
thousand millions of happy children who have known no sin. And we who have\
taken their sins upon us for their happiness will stand up before Thee and\
say: \'93Judge us if Thou canst and darest.\'94 Know that I fear Thee not. Know\
that I too have been in the wilderness, I too have lived on roots and\
locusts, I too prized the freedom with which Thou hast blessed men, and I\
too was striving to stand among Thy elect, among the strong and powerful,\
thirsting \'93to make up the number.\'94 But I awakened and would not serve\
madness. I turned back and joined the ranks of those _who have corrected\
Thy work_. I left the proud and went back to the humble, for the happiness\
of the humble. What I say to Thee will come to pass, and our dominion will\
be built up. I repeat, to\uc0\u8208 morrow Thou shalt see that obedient flock who at\
a sign from me will hasten to heap up the hot cinders about the pile on\
which I shall burn Thee for coming to hinder us. For if any one has ever\
deserved our fires, it is Thou. To\uc0\u8208 morrow I shall burn Thee. _Dixi._\'92 \'94\
\
Ivan stopped. He was carried away as he talked, and spoke with excitement;\
when he had finished, he suddenly smiled.\
\
Alyosha had listened in silence; towards the end he was greatly moved and\
seemed several times on the point of interrupting, but restrained himself.\
Now his words came with a rush.\
\
\'93But ... that\'92s absurd!\'94 he cried, flushing. \'93Your poem is in praise of\
Jesus, not in blame of Him\'97as you meant it to be. And who will believe you\
about freedom? Is that the way to understand it? That\'92s not the idea of it\
in the Orthodox Church.... That\'92s Rome, and not even the whole of Rome,\
it\'92s false\'97those are the worst of the Catholics, the Inquisitors, the\
Jesuits!... And there could not be such a fantastic creature as your\
Inquisitor. What are these sins of mankind they take on themselves? Who\
are these keepers of the mystery who have taken some curse upon themselves\
for the happiness of mankind? When have they been seen? We know the\
Jesuits, they are spoken ill of, but surely they are not what you\
describe? They are not that at all, not at all.... They are simply the\
Romish army for the earthly sovereignty of the world in the future, with\
the Pontiff of Rome for Emperor ... that\'92s their ideal, but there\'92s no\
sort of mystery or lofty melancholy about it.... It\'92s simple lust of\
power, of filthy earthly gain, of domination\'97something like a universal\
serfdom with them as masters\'97that\'92s all they stand for. They don\'92t even\
believe in God perhaps. Your suffering Inquisitor is a mere fantasy.\'94\
\
\'93Stay, stay,\'94 laughed Ivan, \'93how hot you are! A fantasy you say, let it be\
so! Of course it\'92s a fantasy. But allow me to say: do you really think\
that the Roman Catholic movement of the last centuries is actually nothing\
but the lust of power, of filthy earthly gain? Is that Father Pa\'efssy\'92s\
teaching?\'94\
\
\'93No, no, on the contrary, Father Pa\'efssy did once say something rather the\
same as you ... but of course it\'92s not the same, not a bit the same,\'94\
Alyosha hastily corrected himself.\
\
\'93A precious admission, in spite of your \'91not a bit the same.\'92 I ask you\
why your Jesuits and Inquisitors have united simply for vile material\
gain? Why can there not be among them one martyr oppressed by great sorrow\
and loving humanity? You see, only suppose that there was one such man\
among all those who desire nothing but filthy material gain\'97if there\'92s\
only one like my old Inquisitor, who had himself eaten roots in the desert\
and made frenzied efforts to subdue his flesh to make himself free and\
perfect. But yet all his life he loved humanity, and suddenly his eyes\
were opened, and he saw that it is no great moral blessedness to attain\
perfection and freedom, if at the same time one gains the conviction that\
millions of God\'92s creatures have been created as a mockery, that they will\
never be capable of using their freedom, that these poor rebels can never\
turn into giants to complete the tower, that it was not for such geese\
that the great idealist dreamt his dream of harmony. Seeing all that he\
turned back and joined\'97the clever people. Surely that could have\
happened?\'94\
\
\'93Joined whom, what clever people?\'94 cried Alyosha, completely carried away.\
\'93They have no such great cleverness and no mysteries and secrets....\
Perhaps nothing but Atheism, that\'92s all their secret. Your Inquisitor does\
not believe in God, that\'92s his secret!\'94\
\
\'93What if it is so! At last you have guessed it. It\'92s perfectly true, it\'92s\
true that that\'92s the whole secret, but isn\'92t that suffering, at least for\
a man like that, who has wasted his whole life in the desert and yet could\
not shake off his incurable love of humanity? In his old age he reached\
the clear conviction that nothing but the advice of the great dread spirit\
could build up any tolerable sort of life for the feeble, unruly,\
\'91incomplete, empirical creatures created in jest.\'92 And so, convinced of\
this, he sees that he must follow the counsel of the wise spirit, the\
dread spirit of death and destruction, and therefore accept lying and\
deception, and lead men consciously to death and destruction, and yet\
deceive them all the way so that they may not notice where they are being\
led, that the poor blind creatures may at least on the way think\
themselves happy. And note, the deception is in the name of Him in Whose\
ideal the old man had so fervently believed all his life long. Is not that\
tragic? And if only one such stood at the head of the whole army \'91filled\
with the lust of power only for the sake of filthy gain\'92\'97would not one\
such be enough to make a tragedy? More than that, one such standing at the\
head is enough to create the actual leading idea of the Roman Church with\
all its armies and Jesuits, its highest idea. I tell you frankly that I\
firmly believe that there has always been such a man among those who stood\
at the head of the movement. Who knows, there may have been some such even\
among the Roman Popes. Who knows, perhaps the spirit of that accursed old\
man who loves mankind so obstinately in his own way, is to be found even\
now in a whole multitude of such old men, existing not by chance but by\
agreement, as a secret league formed long ago for the guarding of the\
mystery, to guard it from the weak and the unhappy, so as to make them\
happy. No doubt it is so, and so it must be indeed. I fancy that even\
among the Masons there\'92s something of the same mystery at the bottom, and\
that that\'92s why the Catholics so detest the Masons as their rivals\
breaking up the unity of the idea, while it is so essential that there\
should be one flock and one shepherd.... But from the way I defend my idea\
I might be an author impatient of your criticism. Enough of it.\'94\
\
\'93You are perhaps a Mason yourself!\'94 broke suddenly from Alyosha. \'93You\
don\'92t believe in God,\'94 he added, speaking this time very sorrowfully. He\
fancied besides that his brother was looking at him ironically. \'93How does\
your poem end?\'94 he asked, suddenly looking down. \'93Or was it the end?\'94\
\
\'93I meant to end it like this. When the Inquisitor ceased speaking he\
waited some time for his Prisoner to answer him. His silence weighed down\
upon him. He saw that the Prisoner had listened intently all the time,\
looking gently in his face and evidently not wishing to reply. The old man\
longed for Him to say something, however bitter and terrible. But He\
suddenly approached the old man in silence and softly kissed him on his\
bloodless aged lips. That was all His answer. The old man shuddered. His\
lips moved. He went to the door, opened it, and said to Him: \'91Go, and come\
no more ... come not at all, never, never!\'92 And he let Him out into the\
dark alleys of the town. The Prisoner went away.\'94\
\
\'93And the old man?\'94\
\
\'93The kiss glows in his heart, but the old man adheres to his idea.\'94\
\
\'93And you with him, you too?\'94 cried Alyosha, mournfully.\
\
Ivan laughed.\
\
\'93Why, it\'92s all nonsense, Alyosha. It\'92s only a senseless poem of a\
senseless student, who could never write two lines of verse. Why do you\
take it so seriously? Surely you don\'92t suppose I am going straight off to\
the Jesuits, to join the men who are correcting His work? Good Lord, it\'92s\
no business of mine. I told you, all I want is to live on to thirty, and\
then ... dash the cup to the ground!\'94\
\
\'93But the little sticky leaves, and the precious tombs, and the blue sky,\
and the woman you love! How will you live, how will you love them?\'94\
Alyosha cried sorrowfully. \'93With such a hell in your heart and your head,\
how can you? No, that\'92s just what you are going away for, to join them ...\
if not, you will kill yourself, you can\'92t endure it!\'94\
\
\'93There is a strength to endure everything,\'94 Ivan said with a cold smile.\
\
\'93What strength?\'94\
\
\'93The strength of the Karamazovs\'97the strength of the Karamazov baseness.\'94\
\
\'93To sink into debauchery, to stifle your soul with corruption, yes?\'94\
\
\'93Possibly even that ... only perhaps till I am thirty I shall escape it,\
and then\'97\'94\
\
\'93How will you escape it? By what will you escape it? That\'92s impossible\
with your ideas.\'94\
\
\'93In the Karamazov way, again.\'94\
\
\'93 \'91Everything is lawful,\'92 you mean? Everything is lawful, is that it?\'94\
\
Ivan scowled, and all at once turned strangely pale.\
\
\'93Ah, you\'92ve caught up yesterday\'92s phrase, which so offended Mi\'fcsov\'97and\
which Dmitri pounced upon so na\'efvely, and paraphrased!\'94 he smiled queerly.\
\'93Yes, if you like, \'91everything is lawful\'92 since the word has been said. I\
won\'92t deny it. And Mitya\'92s version isn\'92t bad.\'94\
\
Alyosha looked at him in silence.\
\
\'93I thought that going away from here I have you at least,\'94 Ivan said\
suddenly, with unexpected feeling; \'93but now I see that there is no place\
for me even in your heart, my dear hermit. The formula, \'91all is lawful,\'92 I\
won\'92t renounce\'97will you renounce me for that, yes?\'94\
\
Alyosha got up, went to him and softly kissed him on the lips.\
\
\'93That\'92s plagiarism,\'94 cried Ivan, highly delighted. \'93You stole that from my\
poem. Thank you though. Get up, Alyosha, it\'92s time we were going, both of\
us.\'94\
\
They went out, but stopped when they reached the entrance of the\
restaurant.\
\
\'93Listen, Alyosha,\'94 Ivan began in a resolute voice, \'93if I am really able to\
care for the sticky little leaves I shall only love them, remembering you.\
It\'92s enough for me that you are somewhere here, and I shan\'92t lose my\
desire for life yet. Is that enough for you? Take it as a declaration of\
love if you like. And now you go to the right and I to the left. And it\'92s\
enough, do you hear, enough. I mean even if I don\'92t go away to\uc0\u8208 morrow (I\
think I certainly shall go) and we meet again, don\'92t say a word more on\
these subjects. I beg that particularly. And about Dmitri too, I ask you\
specially, never speak to me again,\'94 he added, with sudden irritation;\
\'93it\'92s all exhausted, it has all been said over and over again, hasn\'92t it?\
And I\'92ll make you one promise in return for it. When at thirty, I want to\
\'91dash the cup to the ground,\'92 wherever I may be I\'92ll come to have one more\
talk with you, even though it were from America, you may be sure of that.\
I\'92ll come on purpose. It will be very interesting to have a look at you,\
to see what you\'92ll be by that time. It\'92s rather a solemn promise, you see.\
And we really may be parting for seven years or ten. Come, go now to your\
Pater Seraphicus, he is dying. If he dies without you, you will be angry\
with me for having kept you. Good\uc0\u8208 by, kiss me once more; that\'92s right, now\
go.\'94\
\
Ivan turned suddenly and went his way without looking back. It was just as\
Dmitri had left Alyosha the day before, though the parting had been very\
different. The strange resemblance flashed like an arrow through Alyosha\'92s\
mind in the distress and dejection of that moment. He waited a little,\
looking after his brother. He suddenly noticed that Ivan swayed as he\
walked and that his right shoulder looked lower than his left. He had\
never noticed it before. But all at once he turned too, and almost ran to\
the monastery. It was nearly dark, and he felt almost frightened;\
something new was growing up in him for which he could not account. The\
wind had risen again as on the previous evening, and the ancient pines\
murmured gloomily about him when he entered the hermitage copse. He almost\
ran. \'93Pater Seraphicus\'97he got that name from somewhere\'97where from?\'94\
Alyosha wondered. \'93Ivan, poor Ivan, and when shall I see you again?...\
Here is the hermitage. Yes, yes, that he is, Pater Seraphicus, he will\
save me\'97from him and for ever!\'94\
\
Several times afterwards he wondered how he could on leaving Ivan so\
completely forget his brother Dmitri, though he had that morning, only a\
few hours before, so firmly resolved to find him and not to give up doing\
so, even should he be unable to return to the monastery that night.\
\
\
\
Chapter VI. For Awhile A Very Obscure One\
\
\
And Ivan, on parting from Alyosha, went home to Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s house.\
But, strange to say, he was overcome by insufferable depression, which\
grew greater at every step he took towards the house. There was nothing\
strange in his being depressed; what was strange was that Ivan could not\
have said what was the cause of it. He had often been depressed before,\
and there was nothing surprising at his feeling so at such a moment, when\
he had broken off with everything that had brought him here, and was\
preparing that day to make a new start and enter upon a new, unknown\
future. He would again be as solitary as ever, and though he had great\
hopes, and great\'97too great\'97expectations from life, he could not have given\
any definite account of his hopes, his expectations, or even his desires.\
\
Yet at that moment, though the apprehension of the new and unknown\
certainly found place in his heart, what was worrying him was something\
quite different. \'93Is it loathing for my father\'92s house?\'94 he wondered.\
\'93Quite likely; I am so sick of it; and though it\'92s the last time I shall\
cross its hateful threshold, still I loathe it.... No, it\'92s not that\
either. Is it the parting with Alyosha and the conversation I had with\
him? For so many years I\'92ve been silent with the whole world and not\
deigned to speak, and all of a sudden I reel off a rigmarole like that.\'94\
It certainly might have been the youthful vexation of youthful\
inexperience and vanity\'97vexation at having failed to express himself,\
especially with such a being as Alyosha, on whom his heart had certainly\
been reckoning. No doubt that came in, that vexation, it must have done\
indeed; but yet that was not it, that was not it either. \'93I feel sick with\
depression and yet I can\'92t tell what I want. Better not think, perhaps.\'94\
\
Ivan tried \'93not to think,\'94 but that, too, was no use. What made his\
depression so vexatious and irritating was that it had a kind of casual,\
external character\'97he felt that. Some person or thing seemed to be\
standing out somewhere, just as something will sometimes obtrude itself\
upon the eye, and though one may be so busy with work or conversation that\
for a long time one does not notice it, yet it irritates and almost\
torments one till at last one realizes, and removes the offending object,\
often quite a trifling and ridiculous one\'97some article left about in the\
wrong place, a handkerchief on the floor, a book not replaced on the\
shelf, and so on.\
\
At last, feeling very cross and ill\uc0\u8208 humored, Ivan arrived home, and\
suddenly, about fifteen paces from the garden gate, he guessed what was\
fretting and worrying him.\
\
On a bench in the gateway the valet Smerdyakov was sitting enjoying the\
coolness of the evening, and at the first glance at him Ivan knew that the\
valet Smerdyakov was on his mind, and that it was this man that his soul\
loathed. It all dawned upon him suddenly and became clear. Just before,\
when Alyosha had been telling him of his meeting with Smerdyakov, he had\
felt a sudden twinge of gloom and loathing, which had immediately stirred\
responsive anger in his heart. Afterwards, as he talked, Smerdyakov had\
been forgotten for the time; but still he had been in his mind, and as\
soon as Ivan parted with Alyosha and was walking home, the forgotten\
sensation began to obtrude itself again. \'93Is it possible that a miserable,\
contemptible creature like that can worry me so much?\'94 he wondered, with\
insufferable irritation.\
\
It was true that Ivan had come of late to feel an intense dislike for the\
man, especially during the last few days. He had even begun to notice in\
himself a growing feeling that was almost of hatred for the creature.\
Perhaps this hatred was accentuated by the fact that when Ivan first came\
to the neighborhood he had felt quite differently. Then he had taken a\
marked interest in Smerdyakov, and had even thought him very original. He\
had encouraged him to talk to him, although he had always wondered at a\
certain incoherence, or rather restlessness, in his mind, and could not\
understand what it was that so continually and insistently worked upon the\
brain of \'93the contemplative.\'94 They discussed philosophical questions and\
even how there could have been light on the first day when the sun, moon,\
and stars were only created on the fourth day, and how that was to be\
understood. But Ivan soon saw that, though the sun, moon, and stars might\
be an interesting subject, yet that it was quite secondary to Smerdyakov,\
and that he was looking for something altogether different. In one way and\
another, he began to betray a boundless vanity, and a wounded vanity, too,\
and that Ivan disliked. It had first given rise to his aversion. Later on,\
there had been trouble in the house. Grushenka had come on the scene, and\
there had been the scandals with his brother Dmitri\'97they discussed that,\
too. But though Smerdyakov always talked of that with great excitement, it\
was impossible to discover what he desired to come of it. There was, in\
fact, something surprising in the illogicality and incoherence of some of\
his desires, accidentally betrayed and always vaguely expressed.\
Smerdyakov was always inquiring, putting certain indirect but obviously\
premeditated questions, but what his object was he did not explain, and\
usually at the most important moment he would break off and relapse into\
silence or pass to another subject. But what finally irritated Ivan most\
and confirmed his dislike for him was the peculiar, revolting familiarity\
which Smerdyakov began to show more and more markedly. Not that he forgot\
himself and was rude; on the contrary, he always spoke very respectfully,\
yet he had obviously begun to consider\'97goodness knows why!\'97that there was\
some sort of understanding between him and Ivan Fyodorovitch. He always\
spoke in a tone that suggested that those two had some kind of compact,\
some secret between them, that had at some time been expressed on both\
sides, only known to them and beyond the comprehension of those around\
them. But for a long while Ivan did not recognize the real cause of his\
growing dislike and he had only lately realized what was at the root of\
it.\
\
With a feeling of disgust and irritation he tried to pass in at the gate\
without speaking or looking at Smerdyakov. But Smerdyakov rose from the\
bench, and from that action alone, Ivan knew instantly that he wanted\
particularly to talk to him. Ivan looked at him and stopped, and the fact\
that he did stop, instead of passing by, as he meant to the minute before,\
drove him to fury. With anger and repulsion he looked at Smerdyakov\'92s\
emasculate, sickly face, with the little curls combed forward on his\
forehead. His left eye winked and he grinned as if to say, \'93Where are you\
going? You won\'92t pass by; you see that we two clever people have something\
to say to each other.\'94\
\
Ivan shook. \'93Get away, miserable idiot. What have I to do with you?\'94 was\
on the tip of his tongue, but to his profound astonishment he heard\
himself say, \'93Is my father still asleep, or has he waked?\'94\
\
He asked the question softly and meekly, to his own surprise, and at once,\
again to his own surprise, sat down on the bench. For an instant he felt\
almost frightened; he remembered it afterwards. Smerdyakov stood facing\
him, his hands behind his back, looking at him with assurance and almost\
severity.\
\
\'93His honor is still asleep,\'94 he articulated deliberately (\'93You were the\
first to speak, not I,\'94 he seemed to say). \'93I am surprised at you, sir,\'94\
he added, after a pause, dropping his eyes affectedly, setting his right\
foot forward, and playing with the tip of his polished boot.\
\
\'93Why are you surprised at me?\'94 Ivan asked abruptly and sullenly, doing his\
utmost to restrain himself, and suddenly realizing, with disgust, that he\
was feeling intense curiosity and would not, on any account, have gone\
away without satisfying it.\
\
\'93Why don\'92t you go to Tchermashnya, sir?\'94 Smerdyakov suddenly raised his\
eyes and smiled familiarly. \'93Why I smile you must understand of yourself,\
if you are a clever man,\'94 his screwed\uc0\u8208 up left eye seemed to say.\
\
\'93Why should I go to Tchermashnya?\'94 Ivan asked in surprise.\
\
Smerdyakov was silent again.\
\
\'93Fyodor Pavlovitch himself has so begged you to,\'94 he said at last, slowly\
and apparently attaching no significance to his answer. \'93I put you off\
with a secondary reason,\'94 he seemed to suggest, \'93simply to say something.\'94\
\
\'93Damn you! Speak out what you want!\'94 Ivan cried angrily at last, passing\
from meekness to violence.\
\
Smerdyakov drew his right foot up to his left, pulled himself up, but\
still looked at him with the same serenity and the same little smile.\
\
\'93Substantially nothing\'97but just by way of conversation.\'94\
\
Another silence followed. They did not speak for nearly a minute. Ivan\
knew that he ought to get up and show anger, and Smerdyakov stood before\
him and seemed to be waiting as though to see whether he would be angry or\
not. So at least it seemed to Ivan. At last he moved to get up. Smerdyakov\
seemed to seize the moment.\
\
\'93I\'92m in an awful position, Ivan Fyodorovitch. I don\'92t know how to help\
myself,\'94 he said resolutely and distinctly, and at his last word he\
sighed. Ivan Fyodorovitch sat down again.\
\
\'93They are both utterly crazy, they are no better than little children,\'94\
Smerdyakov went on. \'93I am speaking of your parent and your brother Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch. Here Fyodor Pavlovitch will get up directly and begin\
worrying me every minute, \'91Has she come? Why hasn\'92t she come?\'92 and so on\
up till midnight and even after midnight. And if Agrafena Alexandrovna\
doesn\'92t come (for very likely she does not mean to come at all) then he\
will be at me again to\uc0\u8208 morrow morning, \'91Why hasn\'92t she come? When will she\
come?\'92\'97as though I were to blame for it. On the other side it\'92s no better.\
As soon as it gets dark, or even before, your brother will appear with his\
gun in his hands: \'91Look out, you rogue, you soup\uc0\u8208 maker. If you miss her\
and don\'92t let me know she\'92s been\'97I\'92ll kill you before any one.\'92 When the\
night\'92s over, in the morning, he, too, like Fyodor Pavlovitch, begins\
worrying me to death. \'91Why hasn\'92t she come? Will she come soon?\'92 And he,\
too, thinks me to blame because his lady hasn\'92t come. And every day and\
every hour they get angrier and angrier, so that I sometimes think I shall\
kill myself in a fright. I can\'92t depend upon them, sir.\'94\
\
\'93And why have you meddled? Why did you begin to spy for Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch?\'94 said Ivan irritably.\
\
\'93How could I help meddling? Though, indeed, I haven\'92t meddled at all, if\
you want to know the truth of the matter. I kept quiet from the very\
beginning, not daring to answer; but he pitched on me to be his servant.\
He has had only one thing to say since: \'91I\'92ll kill you, you scoundrel, if\
you miss her,\'92 I feel certain, sir, that I shall have a long fit to\uc0\u8208 \
morrow.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean by \'91a long fit\'92?\'94\
\
\'93A long fit, lasting a long time\'97several hours, or perhaps a day or two.\
Once it went on for three days. I fell from the garret that time. The\
struggling ceased and then began again, and for three days I couldn\'92t come\
back to my senses. Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Herzenstube, the doctor\
here, and he put ice on my head and tried another remedy, too.... I might\
have died.\'94\
\
\'93But they say one can\'92t tell with epilepsy when a fit is coming. What\
makes you say you will have one to\uc0\u8208 morrow?\'94 Ivan inquired, with a\
peculiar, irritable curiosity.\
\
\'93That\'92s just so. You can\'92t tell beforehand.\'94\
\
\'93Besides, you fell from the garret then.\'94\
\
\'93I climb up to the garret every day. I might fall from the garret again\
to\uc0\u8208 morrow. And, if not, I might fall down the cellar steps. I have to go\
into the cellar every day, too.\'94\
\
Ivan took a long look at him.\
\
\'93You are talking nonsense, I see, and I don\'92t quite understand you,\'94 he\
said softly, but with a sort of menace. \'93Do you mean to pretend to be ill\
to\uc0\u8208 morrow for three days, eh?\'94\
\
Smerdyakov, who was looking at the ground again, and playing with the toe\
of his right foot, set the foot down, moved the left one forward, and,\
grinning, articulated:\
\
\'93If I were able to play such a trick, that is, pretend to have a fit\'97and\
it would not be difficult for a man accustomed to them\'97I should have a\
perfect right to use such a means to save myself from death. For even if\
Agrafena Alexandrovna comes to see his father while I am ill, his honor\
can\'92t blame a sick man for not telling him. He\'92d be ashamed to.\'94\
\
\'93Hang it all!\'94 Ivan cried, his face working with anger, \'93why are you\
always in such a funk for your life? All my brother Dmitri\'92s threats are\
only hasty words and mean nothing. He won\'92t kill you; it\'92s not you he\'92ll\
kill!\'94\
\
\'93He\'92d kill me first of all, like a fly. But even more than that, I am\
afraid I shall be taken for an accomplice of his when he does something\
crazy to his father.\'94\
\
\'93Why should you be taken for an accomplice?\'94\
\
\'93They\'92ll think I am an accomplice, because I let him know the signals as a\
great secret.\'94\
\
\'93What signals? Whom did you tell? Confound you, speak more plainly.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m bound to admit the fact,\'94 Smerdyakov drawled with pedantic composure,\
\'93that I have a secret with Fyodor Pavlovitch in this business. As you know\
yourself (if only you do know it) he has for several days past locked\
himself in as soon as night or even evening comes on. Of late you\'92ve been\
going upstairs to your room early every evening, and yesterday you did not\
come down at all, and so perhaps you don\'92t know how carefully he has begun\
to lock himself in at night, and even if Grigory Vassilyevitch comes to\
the door he won\'92t open to him till he hears his voice. But Grigory\
Vassilyevitch does not come, because I wait upon him alone in his room\
now. That\'92s the arrangement he made himself ever since this to\uc0\u8208 do with\
Agrafena Alexandrovna began. But at night, by his orders, I go away to the\
lodge so that I don\'92t get to sleep till midnight, but am on the watch,\
getting up and walking about the yard, waiting for Agrafena Alexandrovna\
to come. For the last few days he\'92s been perfectly frantic expecting her.\
What he argues is, she is afraid of him, Dmitri Fyodorovitch (Mitya, as he\
calls him), \'91and so,\'92 says he, \'91she\'92ll come the back\uc0\u8208 way, late at night,\
to me. You look out for her,\'92 says he, \'91till midnight and later; and if\
she does come, you run up and knock at my door or at the window from the\
garden. Knock at first twice, rather gently, and then three times more\
quickly, then,\'92 says he, \'91I shall understand at once that she has come,\
and will open the door to you quietly.\'92 Another signal he gave me in case\
anything unexpected happens. At first, two knocks, and then, after an\
interval, another much louder. Then he will understand that something has\
happened suddenly and that I must see him, and he will open to me so that\
I can go and speak to him. That\'92s all in case Agrafena Alexandrovna can\'92t\
come herself, but sends a message. Besides, Dmitri Fyodorovitch might\
come, too, so I must let him know he is near. His honor is awfully afraid\
of Dmitri Fyodorovitch, so that even if Agrafena Alexandrovna had come and\
were locked in with him, and Dmitri Fyodorovitch were to turn up anywhere\
near at the time, I should be bound to let him know at once, knocking\
three times. So that the first signal of five knocks means Agrafena\
Alexandrovna has come, while the second signal of three knocks means\
\'91something important to tell you.\'92 His honor has shown me them several\
times and explained them. And as in the whole universe no one knows of\
these signals but myself and his honor, so he\'92d open the door without the\
slightest hesitation and without calling out (he is awfully afraid of\
calling out aloud). Well, those signals are known to Dmitri Fyodorovitch\
too, now.\'94\
\
\'93How are they known? Did you tell him? How dared you tell him?\'94\
\
\'93It was through fright I did it. How could I dare to keep it back from\
him? Dmitri Fyodorovitch kept persisting every day, \'91You are deceiving me,\
you are hiding something from me! I\'92ll break both your legs for you.\'92 So I\
told him those secret signals that he might see my slavish devotion, and\
might be satisfied that I was not deceiving him, but was telling him all I\
could.\'94\
\
\'93If you think that he\'92ll make use of those signals and try to get in,\
don\'92t let him in.\'94\
\
\'93But if I should be laid up with a fit, how can I prevent him coming in\
then, even if I dared prevent him, knowing how desperate he is?\'94\
\
\'93Hang it! How can you be so sure you are going to have a fit, confound\
you? Are you laughing at me?\'94\
\
\'93How could I dare laugh at you? I am in no laughing humor with this fear\
on me. I feel I am going to have a fit. I have a presentiment. Fright\
alone will bring it on.\'94\
\
\'93Confound it! If you are laid up, Grigory will be on the watch. Let\
Grigory know beforehand; he will be sure not to let him in.\'94\
\
\'93I should never dare to tell Grigory Vassilyevitch about the signals\
without orders from my master. And as for Grigory Vassilyevitch hearing\
him and not admitting him, he has been ill ever since yesterday, and Marfa\
Ignatyevna intends to give him medicine to\uc0\u8208 morrow. They\'92ve just arranged\
it. It\'92s a very strange remedy of hers. Marfa Ignatyevna knows of a\
preparation and always keeps it. It\'92s a strong thing made from some herb.\
She has the secret of it, and she always gives it to Grigory Vassilyevitch\
three times a year when his lumbago\'92s so bad he is almost paralyzed by it.\
Then she takes a towel, wets it with the stuff, and rubs his whole back\
for half an hour till it\'92s quite red and swollen, and what\'92s left in the\
bottle she gives him to drink with a special prayer; but not quite all,\
for on such occasions she leaves some for herself, and drinks it herself.\
And as they never take strong drink, I assure you they both drop asleep at\
once and sleep sound a very long time. And when Grigory Vassilyevitch\
wakes up he is perfectly well after it, but Marfa Ignatyevna always has a\
headache from it. So, if Marfa Ignatyevna carries out her intention to\uc0\u8208 \
morrow, they won\'92t hear anything and hinder Dmitri Fyodorovitch. They\'92ll\
be asleep.\'94\
\
\'93What a rigmarole! And it all seems to happen at once, as though it were\
planned. You\'92ll have a fit and they\'92ll both be unconscious,\'94 cried Ivan.\
\'93But aren\'92t you trying to arrange it so?\'94 broke from him suddenly, and he\
frowned threateningly.\
\
\'93How could I?... And why should I, when it all depends on Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch and his plans?... If he means to do anything, he\'92ll do it;\
but if not, I shan\'92t be thrusting him upon his father.\'94\
\
\'93And why should he go to father, especially on the sly, if, as you say\
yourself, Agrafena Alexandrovna won\'92t come at all?\'94 Ivan went on, turning\
white with anger. \'93You say that yourself, and all the while I\'92ve been\
here, I\'92ve felt sure it was all the old man\'92s fancy, and the creature\
won\'92t come to him. Why should Dmitri break in on him if she doesn\'92t come?\
Speak, I want to know what you are thinking!\'94\
\
\'93You know yourself why he\'92ll come. What\'92s the use of what I think? His\
honor will come simply because he is in a rage or suspicious on account of\
my illness perhaps, and he\'92ll dash in, as he did yesterday through\
impatience to search the rooms, to see whether she hasn\'92t escaped him on\
the sly. He is perfectly well aware, too, that Fyodor Pavlovitch has a big\
envelope with three thousand roubles in it, tied up with ribbon and sealed\
with three seals. On it is written in his own hand, \'91To my angel\
Grushenka, if she will come,\'92 to which he added three days later, \'91for my\
little chicken.\'92 There\'92s no knowing what that might do.\'94\
\
\'93Nonsense!\'94 cried Ivan, almost beside himself. \'93Dmitri won\'92t come to steal\
money and kill my father to do it. He might have killed him yesterday on\
account of Grushenka, like the frantic, savage fool he is, but he won\'92t\
steal.\'94\
\
\'93He is in very great need of money now\'97the greatest need, Ivan\
Fyodorovitch. You don\'92t know in what need he is,\'94 Smerdyakov explained,\
with perfect composure and remarkable distinctness. \'93He looks on that\
three thousand as his own, too. He said so to me himself. \'91My father still\
owes me just three thousand,\'92 he said. And besides that, consider, Ivan\
Fyodorovitch, there is something else perfectly true. It\'92s as good as\
certain, so to say, that Agrafena Alexandrovna will force him, if only she\
cares to, to marry her\'97the master himself, I mean, Fyodor Pavlovitch\'97if\
only she cares to, and of course she may care to. All I\'92ve said is that\
she won\'92t come, but maybe she\'92s looking for more than that\'97I mean to be\
mistress here. I know myself that Samsonov, her merchant, was laughing\
with her about it, telling her quite openly that it would not be at all a\
stupid thing to do. And she\'92s got plenty of sense. She wouldn\'92t marry a\
beggar like Dmitri Fyodorovitch. So, taking that into consideration, Ivan\
Fyodorovitch, reflect that then neither Dmitri Fyodorovitch nor yourself\
and your brother, Alexey Fyodorovitch, would have anything after the\
master\'92s death, not a rouble, for Agrafena Alexandrovna would marry him\
simply to get hold of the whole, all the money there is. But if your\
father were to die now, there\'92d be some forty thousand for sure, even for\
Dmitri Fyodorovitch whom he hates so, for he\'92s made no will.... Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch knows all that very well.\'94\
\
A sort of shudder passed over Ivan\'92s face. He suddenly flushed.\
\
\'93Then why on earth,\'94 he suddenly interrupted Smerdyakov, \'93do you advise me\
to go to Tchermashnya? What did you mean by that? If I go away, you see\
what will happen here.\'94 Ivan drew his breath with difficulty.\
\
\'93Precisely so,\'94 said Smerdyakov, softly and reasonably, watching Ivan\
intently, however.\
\
\'93What do you mean by \'91precisely so\'92?\'94 Ivan questioned him, with a menacing\
light in his eyes, restraining himself with difficulty.\
\
\'93I spoke because I felt sorry for you. If I were in your place I should\
simply throw it all up ... rather than stay on in such a position,\'94\
answered Smerdyakov, with the most candid air looking at Ivan\'92s flashing\
eyes. They were both silent.\
\
\'93You seem to be a perfect idiot, and what\'92s more ... an awful scoundrel,\
too.\'94 Ivan rose suddenly from the bench. He was about to pass straight\
through the gate, but he stopped short and turned to Smerdyakov. Something\
strange followed. Ivan, in a sudden paroxysm, bit his lip, clenched his\
fists, and, in another minute, would have flung himself on Smerdyakov. The\
latter, anyway, noticed it at the same moment, started, and shrank back.\
But the moment passed without mischief to Smerdyakov, and Ivan turned in\
silence, as it seemed in perplexity, to the gate.\
\
\'93I am going away to Moscow to\uc0\u8208 morrow, if you care to know\'97early to\u8208 morrow\
morning. That\'92s all!\'94 he suddenly said aloud angrily, and wondered himself\
afterwards what need there was to say this then to Smerdyakov.\
\
\'93That\'92s the best thing you can do,\'94 he responded, as though he had\
expected to hear it; \'93except that you can always be telegraphed for from\
Moscow, if anything should happen here.\'94\
\
Ivan stopped again, and again turned quickly to Smerdyakov. But a change\
had passed over him, too. All his familiarity and carelessness had\
completely disappeared. His face expressed attention and expectation,\
intent but timid and cringing.\
\
\'93Haven\'92t you something more to say\'97something to add?\'94 could be read in the\
intent gaze he fixed on Ivan.\
\
\'93And couldn\'92t I be sent for from Tchermashnya, too\'97in case anything\
happened?\'94 Ivan shouted suddenly, for some unknown reason raising his\
voice.\
\
\'93From Tchermashnya, too ... you could be sent for,\'94 Smerdyakov muttered,\
almost in a whisper, looking disconcerted, but gazing intently into Ivan\'92s\
eyes.\
\
\'93Only Moscow is farther and Tchermashnya is nearer. Is it to save my\
spending money on the fare, or to save my going so far out of my way, that\
you insist on Tchermashnya?\'94\
\
\'93Precisely so ...\'94 muttered Smerdyakov, with a breaking voice. He looked\
at Ivan with a revolting smile, and again made ready to draw back. But to\
his astonishment Ivan broke into a laugh, and went through the gate still\
laughing. Any one who had seen his face at that moment would have known\
that he was not laughing from lightness of heart, and he could not have\
explained himself what he was feeling at that instant. He moved and walked\
as though in a nervous frenzy.\
\
\
\
Chapter VII. \'93It\'92s Always Worth While Speaking To A Clever Man\'94\
\
\
And in the same nervous frenzy, too, he spoke. Meeting Fyodor Pavlovitch\
in the drawing\uc0\u8208 room directly he went in, he shouted to him, waving his\
hands, \'93I am going upstairs to my room, not in to you. Good\uc0\u8208 by!\'94 and\
passed by, trying not even to look at his father. Very possibly the old\
man was too hateful to him at that moment; but such an unceremonious\
display of hostility was a surprise even to Fyodor Pavlovitch. And the old\
man evidently wanted to tell him something at once and had come to meet\
him in the drawing\uc0\u8208 room on purpose. Receiving this amiable greeting, he\
stood still in silence and with an ironical air watched his son going\
upstairs, till he passed out of sight.\
\
\'93What\'92s the matter with him?\'94 he promptly asked Smerdyakov, who had\
followed Ivan.\
\
\'93Angry about something. Who can tell?\'94 the valet muttered evasively.\
\
\'93Confound him! Let him be angry then. Bring in the samovar, and get along\
with you. Look sharp! No news?\'94\
\
Then followed a series of questions such as Smerdyakov had just complained\
of to Ivan, all relating to his expected visitor, and these questions we\
will omit. Half an hour later the house was locked, and the crazy old man\
was wandering along through the rooms in excited expectation of hearing\
every minute the five knocks agreed upon. Now and then he peered out into\
the darkness, seeing nothing.\
\
It was very late, but Ivan was still awake and reflecting. He sat up late\
that night, till two o\'92clock. But we will not give an account of his\
thoughts, and this is not the place to look into that soul\'97its turn will\
come. And even if one tried, it would be very hard to give an account of\
them, for there were no thoughts in his brain, but something very vague,\
and, above all, intense excitement. He felt himself that he had lost his\
bearings. He was fretted, too, by all sorts of strange and almost\
surprising desires; for instance, after midnight he suddenly had an\
intense irresistible inclination to go down, open the door, go to the\
lodge and beat Smerdyakov. But if he had been asked why, he could not have\
given any exact reason, except perhaps that he loathed the valet as one\
who had insulted him more gravely than any one in the world. On the other\
hand, he was more than once that night overcome by a sort of inexplicable\
humiliating terror, which he felt positively paralyzed his physical\
powers. His head ached and he was giddy. A feeling of hatred was rankling\
in his heart, as though he meant to avenge himself on some one. He even\
hated Alyosha, recalling the conversation he had just had with him. At\
moments he hated himself intensely. Of Katerina Ivanovna he almost forgot\
to think, and wondered greatly at this afterwards, especially as he\
remembered perfectly that when he had protested so valiantly to Katerina\
Ivanovna that he would go away next day to Moscow, something had whispered\
in his heart, \'93That\'92s nonsense, you are not going, and it won\'92t be so easy\
to tear yourself away as you are boasting now.\'94\
\
Remembering that night long afterwards, Ivan recalled with peculiar\
repulsion how he had suddenly got up from the sofa and had stealthily, as\
though he were afraid of being watched, opened the door, gone out on the\
staircase and listened to Fyodor Pavlovitch stirring down below, had\
listened a long while\'97some five minutes\'97with a sort of strange curiosity,\
holding his breath while his heart throbbed. And why he had done all this,\
why he was listening, he could not have said. That \'93action\'94 all his life\
afterwards he called \'93infamous,\'94 and at the bottom of his heart, he\
thought of it as the basest action of his life. For Fyodor Pavlovitch\
himself he felt no hatred at that moment, but was simply intensely curious\
to know how he was walking down there below and what he must be doing now.\
He wondered and imagined how he must be peeping out of the dark windows\
and stopping in the middle of the room, listening, listening\'97for some one\
to knock. Ivan went out on to the stairs twice to listen like this.\
\
About two o\'92clock when everything was quiet, and even Fyodor Pavlovitch\
had gone to bed, Ivan had got into bed, firmly resolved to fall asleep at\
once, as he felt fearfully exhausted. And he did fall asleep at once, and\
slept soundly without dreams, but waked early, at seven o\'92clock, when it\
was broad daylight. Opening his eyes, he was surprised to feel himself\
extraordinarily vigorous. He jumped up at once and dressed quickly; then\
dragged out his trunk and began packing immediately. His linen had come\
back from the laundress the previous morning. Ivan positively smiled at\
the thought that everything was helping his sudden departure. And his\
departure certainly was sudden. Though Ivan had said the day before (to\
Katerina Ivanovna, Alyosha, and Smerdyakov) that he was leaving next day,\
yet he remembered that he had no thought of departure when he went to bed,\
or, at least, had not dreamed that his first act in the morning would be\
to pack his trunk. At last his trunk and bag were ready. It was about nine\
o\'92clock when Marfa Ignatyevna came in with her usual inquiry, \'93Where will\
your honor take your tea, in your own room or downstairs?\'94 He looked\
almost cheerful, but there was about him, about his words and gestures,\
something hurried and scattered. Greeting his father affably, and even\
inquiring specially after his health, though he did not wait to hear his\
answer to the end, he announced that he was starting off in an hour to\
return to Moscow for good, and begged him to send for the horses. His\
father heard this announcement with no sign of surprise, and forgot in an\
unmannerly way to show regret at losing him. Instead of doing so, he flew\
into a great flutter at the recollection of some important business of his\
own.\
\
\'93What a fellow you are! Not to tell me yesterday! Never mind; we\'92ll manage\
it all the same. Do me a great service, my dear boy. Go to Tchermashnya on\
the way. It\'92s only to turn to the left from the station at Volovya, only\
another twelve versts and you come to Tchermashnya.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m sorry, I can\'92t. It\'92s eighty versts to the railway and the train\
starts for Moscow at seven o\'92clock to\uc0\u8208 night. I can only just catch it.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ll catch it to\uc0\u8208 morrow or the day after, but to\u8208 day turn off to\
Tchermashnya. It won\'92t put you out much to humor your father! If I hadn\'92t\
had something to keep me here, I would have run over myself long ago, for\
I\'92ve some business there in a hurry. But here I ... it\'92s not the time for\
me to go now.... You see, I\'92ve two pieces of copse land there. The\
Maslovs, an old merchant and his son, will give eight thousand for the\
timber. But last year I just missed a purchaser who would have given\
twelve. There\'92s no getting any one about here to buy it. The Maslovs have\
it all their own way. One has to take what they\'92ll give, for no one here\
dare bid against them. The priest at Ilyinskoe wrote to me last Thursday\
that a merchant called Gorstkin, a man I know, had turned up. What makes\
him valuable is that he is not from these parts, so he is not afraid of\
the Maslovs. He says he will give me eleven thousand for the copse. Do you\
hear? But he\'92ll only be here, the priest writes, for a week altogether, so\
you must go at once and make a bargain with him.\'94\
\
\'93Well, you write to the priest; he\'92ll make the bargain.\'94\
\
\'93He can\'92t do it. He has no eye for business. He is a perfect treasure, I\'92d\
give him twenty thousand to take care of for me without a receipt; but he\
has no eye for business, he is a perfect child, a crow could deceive him.\
And yet he is a learned man, would you believe it? This Gorstkin looks\
like a peasant, he wears a blue kaftan, but he is a regular rogue. That\'92s\
the common complaint. He is a liar. Sometimes he tells such lies that you\
wonder why he is doing it. He told me the year before last that his wife\
was dead and that he had married another, and would you believe it, there\
was not a word of truth in it? His wife has never died at all, she is\
alive to this day and gives him a beating twice a week. So what you have\
to find out is whether he is lying or speaking the truth, when he says he\
wants to buy it and would give eleven thousand.\'94\
\
\'93I shall be no use in such a business. I have no eye either.\'94\
\
\'93Stay, wait a bit! You will be of use, for I will tell you the signs by\
which you can judge about Gorstkin. I\'92ve done business with him a long\
time. You see, you must watch his beard; he has a nasty, thin, red beard.\
If his beard shakes when he talks and he gets cross, it\'92s all right, he is\
saying what he means, he wants to do business. But if he strokes his beard\
with his left hand and grins\'97he is trying to cheat you. Don\'92t watch his\
eyes, you won\'92t find out anything from his eyes, he is a deep one, a\
rogue\'97but watch his beard! I\'92ll give you a note and you show it to him.\
He\'92s called Gorstkin, though his real name is Lyagavy(4); but don\'92t call\
him so, he will be offended. If you come to an understanding with him, and\
see it\'92s all right, write here at once. You need only write: \'91He\'92s not\
lying.\'92 Stand out for eleven thousand; one thousand you can knock off, but\
not more. Just think! there\'92s a difference between eight thousand and\
eleven thousand. It\'92s as good as picking up three thousand; it\'92s not so\
easy to find a purchaser, and I\'92m in desperate need of money. Only let me\
know it\'92s serious, and I\'92ll run over and fix it up. I\'92ll snatch the time\
somehow. But what\'92s the good of my galloping over, if it\'92s all a notion of\
the priest\'92s? Come, will you go?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I can\'92t spare the time. You must excuse me.\'94\
\
\'93Come, you might oblige your father. I shan\'92t forget it. You\'92ve no heart,\
any of you\'97that\'92s what it is? What\'92s a day or two to you? Where are you\
going now\'97to Venice? Your Venice will keep another two days. I would have\
sent Alyosha, but what use is Alyosha in a thing like that? I send you\
just because you are a clever fellow. Do you suppose I don\'92t see that? You\
know nothing about timber, but you\'92ve got an eye. All that is wanted is to\
see whether the man is in earnest. I tell you, watch his beard\'97if his\
beard shakes you know he is in earnest.\'94\
\
\'93You force me to go to that damned Tchermashnya yourself, then?\'94 cried\
Ivan, with a malignant smile.\
\
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not catch, or would not catch, the malignancy, but\
he caught the smile.\
\
\'93Then you\'92ll go, you\'92ll go? I\'92ll scribble the note for you at once.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know whether I shall go. I don\'92t know. I\'92ll decide on the way.\'94\
\
\'93Nonsense! Decide at once. My dear fellow, decide! If you settle the\
matter, write me a line; give it to the priest and he\'92ll send it on to me\
at once. And I won\'92t delay you more than that. You can go to Venice. The\
priest will give you horses back to Volovya station.\'94\
\
The old man was quite delighted. He wrote the note, and sent for the\
horses. A light lunch was brought in, with brandy. When Fyodor Pavlovitch\
was pleased, he usually became expansive, but to\uc0\u8208 day he seemed to restrain\
himself. Of Dmitri, for instance, he did not say a word. He was quite\
unmoved by the parting, and seemed, in fact, at a loss for something to\
say. Ivan noticed this particularly. \'93He must be bored with me,\'94 he\
thought. Only when accompanying his son out on to the steps, the old man\
began to fuss about. He would have kissed him, but Ivan made haste to hold\
out his hand, obviously avoiding the kiss. His father saw it at once, and\
instantly pulled himself up.\
\
\'93Well, good luck to you, good luck to you!\'94 he repeated from the steps.\
\'93You\'92ll come again some time or other? Mind you do come. I shall always be\
glad to see you. Well, Christ be with you!\'94\
\
Ivan got into the carriage.\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by, Ivan! Don\'92t be too hard on me!\'94 the father called for the last\
time.\
\
The whole household came out to take leave\'97Smerdyakov, Marfa and Grigory.\
Ivan gave them ten roubles each. When he had seated himself in the\
carriage, Smerdyakov jumped up to arrange the rug.\
\
\'93You see ... I am going to Tchermashnya,\'94 broke suddenly from Ivan. Again,\
as the day before, the words seemed to drop of themselves, and he laughed,\
too, a peculiar, nervous laugh. He remembered it long after.\
\
\'93It\'92s a true saying then, that \'91it\'92s always worth while speaking to a\
clever man,\'92 \'94 answered Smerdyakov firmly, looking significantly at Ivan.\
\
The carriage rolled away. Nothing was clear in Ivan\'92s soul, but he looked\
eagerly around him at the fields, at the hills, at the trees, at a flock\
of geese flying high overhead in the bright sky. And all of a sudden he\
felt very happy. He tried to talk to the driver, and he felt intensely\
interested in an answer the peasant made him; but a minute later he\
realized that he was not catching anything, and that he had not really\
even taken in the peasant\'92s answer. He was silent, and it was pleasant\
even so. The air was fresh, pure and cool, the sky bright. The images of\
Alyosha and Katerina Ivanovna floated into his mind. But he softly smiled,\
blew softly on the friendly phantoms, and they flew away. \'93There\'92s plenty\
of time for them,\'94 he thought. They reached the station quickly, changed\
horses, and galloped to Volovya. \'93Why is it worth while speaking to a\
clever man? What did he mean by that?\'94 The thought seemed suddenly to\
clutch at his breathing. \'93And why did I tell him I was going to\
Tchermashnya?\'94 They reached Volovya station. Ivan got out of the carriage,\
and the drivers stood round him bargaining over the journey of twelve\
versts to Tchermashnya. He told them to harness the horses. He went into\
the station house, looked round, glanced at the overseer\'92s wife, and\
suddenly went back to the entrance.\
\
\'93I won\'92t go to Tchermashnya. Am I too late to reach the railway by seven,\
brothers?\'94\
\
\'93We shall just do it. Shall we get the carriage out?\'94\
\
\'93At once. Will any one of you be going to the town to\uc0\u8208 morrow?\'94\
\
\'93To be sure. Mitri here will.\'94\
\
\'93Can you do me a service, Mitri? Go to my father\'92s, to Fyodor Pavlovitch\
Karamazov, and tell him I haven\'92t gone to Tchermashnya. Can you?\'94\
\
\'93Of course I can. I\'92ve known Fyodor Pavlovitch a long time.\'94\
\
\'93And here\'92s something for you, for I dare say he won\'92t give you anything,\'94\
said Ivan, laughing gayly.\
\
\'93You may depend on it he won\'92t.\'94 Mitya laughed too. \'93Thank you, sir. I\'92ll\
be sure to do it.\'94\
\
At seven o\'92clock Ivan got into the train and set off to Moscow \'93Away with\
the past. I\'92ve done with the old world for ever, and may I have no news,\
no echo, from it. To a new life, new places and no looking back!\'94 But\
instead of delight his soul was filled with such gloom, and his heart\
ached with such anguish, as he had never known in his life before. He was\
thinking all the night. The train flew on, and only at daybreak, when he\
was approaching Moscow, he suddenly roused himself from his meditation.\
\
\'93I am a scoundrel,\'94 he whispered to himself.\
\
Fyodor Pavlovitch remained well satisfied at having seen his son off. For\
two hours afterwards he felt almost happy, and sat drinking brandy. But\
suddenly something happened which was very annoying and unpleasant for\
every one in the house, and completely upset Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s\
equanimity at once. Smerdyakov went to the cellar for something and fell\
down from the top of the steps. Fortunately, Marfa Ignatyevna was in the\
yard and heard him in time. She did not see the fall, but heard his\
scream\'97the strange, peculiar scream, long familiar to her\'97the scream of\
the epileptic falling in a fit. They could not tell whether the fit had\
come on him at the moment he was descending the steps, so that he must\
have fallen unconscious, or whether it was the fall and the shock that had\
caused the fit in Smerdyakov, who was known to be liable to them. They\
found him at the bottom of the cellar steps, writhing in convulsions and\
foaming at the mouth. It was thought at first that he must have broken\
something\'97an arm or a leg\'97and hurt himself, but \'93God had preserved him,\'94\
as Marfa Ignatyevna expressed it\'97nothing of the kind had happened. But it\
was difficult to get him out of the cellar. They asked the neighbors to\
help and managed it somehow. Fyodor Pavlovitch himself was present at the\
whole ceremony. He helped, evidently alarmed and upset. The sick man did\
not regain consciousness; the convulsions ceased for a time, but then\
began again, and every one concluded that the same thing would happen, as\
had happened a year before, when he accidentally fell from the garret.\
They remembered that ice had been put on his head then. There was still\
ice in the cellar, and Marfa Ignatyevna had some brought up. In the\
evening, Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Doctor Herzenstube, who arrived at\
once. He was a most estimable old man, and the most careful and\
conscientious doctor in the province. After careful examination, he\
concluded that the fit was a very violent one and might have serious\
consequences; that meanwhile he, Herzenstube, did not fully understand it,\
but that by to\uc0\u8208 morrow morning, if the present remedies were unavailing, he\
would venture to try something else. The invalid was taken to the lodge,\
to a room next to Grigory\'92s and Marfa Ignatyevna\'92s.\
\
Then Fyodor Pavlovitch had one misfortune after another to put up with\
that day. Marfa Ignatyevna cooked the dinner, and the soup, compared with\
Smerdyakov\'92s, was \'93no better than dish\uc0\u8208 water,\'94 and the fowl was so dried\
up that it was impossible to masticate it. To her master\'92s bitter, though\
deserved, reproaches, Marfa Ignatyevna replied that the fowl was a very\
old one to begin with, and that she had never been trained as a cook. In\
the evening there was another trouble in store for Fyodor Pavlovitch; he\
was informed that Grigory, who had not been well for the last three days,\
was completely laid up by his lumbago. Fyodor Pavlovitch finished his tea\
as early as possible and locked himself up alone in the house. He was in\
terrible excitement and suspense. That evening he reckoned on Grushenka\'92s\
coming almost as a certainty. He had received from Smerdyakov that morning\
an assurance \'93that she had promised to come without fail.\'94 The\
incorrigible old man\'92s heart throbbed with excitement; he paced up and\
down his empty rooms listening. He had to be on the alert. Dmitri might be\
on the watch for her somewhere, and when she knocked on the window\
(Smerdyakov had informed him two days before that he had told her where\
and how to knock) the door must be opened at once. She must not be a\
second in the passage, for fear\'97which God forbid!\'97that she should be\
frightened and run away. Fyodor Pavlovitch had much to think of, but never\
had his heart been steeped in such voluptuous hopes. This time he could\
say almost certainly that she would come!\
\
\
\
\
Book VI. The Russian Monk\
\
\
\
Chapter I. Father Zossima And His Visitors\
\
\
When with an anxious and aching heart Alyosha went into his elder\'92s cell,\
he stood still almost astonished. Instead of a sick man at his last gasp,\
perhaps unconscious, as he had feared to find him, he saw him sitting up\
in his chair and, though weak and exhausted, his face was bright and\
cheerful, he was surrounded by visitors and engaged in a quiet and joyful\
conversation. But he had only got up from his bed a quarter of an hour\
before Alyosha\'92s arrival; his visitors had gathered together in his cell\
earlier, waiting for him to wake, having received a most confident\
assurance from Father Pa\'efssy that \'93the teacher would get up, and as he had\
himself promised in the morning, converse once more with those dear to his\
heart.\'94 This promise and indeed every word of the dying elder Father\
Pa\'efssy put implicit trust in. If he had seen him unconscious, if he had\
seen him breathe his last, and yet had his promise that he would rise up\
and say good\uc0\u8208 by to him, he would not have believed perhaps even in death,\
but would still have expected the dead man to recover and fulfill his\
promise. In the morning as he lay down to sleep, Father Zossima had told\
him positively: \'93I shall not die without the delight of another\
conversation with you, beloved of my heart. I shall look once more on your\
dear face and pour out my heart to you once again.\'94 The monks, who had\
gathered for this probably last conversation with Father Zossima, had all\
been his devoted friends for many years. There were four of them: Father\
Iosif and Father Pa\'efssy, Father Miha\'efl, the warden of the hermitage, a man\
not very old and far from being learned. He was of humble origin, of\
strong will and steadfast faith, of austere appearance, but of deep\
tenderness, though he obviously concealed it as though he were almost\
ashamed of it. The fourth, Father Anfim, was a very old and humble little\
monk of the poorest peasant class. He was almost illiterate, and very\
quiet, scarcely speaking to any one. He was the humblest of the humble,\
and looked as though he had been frightened by something great and awful\
beyond the scope of his intelligence. Father Zossima had a great affection\
for this timorous man, and always treated him with marked respect, though\
perhaps there was no one he had known to whom he had said less, in spite\
of the fact that he had spent years wandering about holy Russia with him.\
That was very long ago, forty years before, when Father Zossima first\
began his life as a monk in a poor and little monastery at Kostroma, and\
when, shortly after, he had accompanied Father Anfim on his pilgrimage to\
collect alms for their poor monastery.\
\
The whole party were in the bedroom which, as we mentioned before, was\
very small, so that there was scarcely room for the four of them (in\
addition to Porfiry, the novice, who stood) to sit round Father Zossima on\
chairs brought from the sitting\uc0\u8208 room. It was already beginning to get\
dark, the room was lighted up by the lamps and the candles before the\
ikons.\
\
Seeing Alyosha standing embarrassed in the doorway, Father Zossima smiled\
at him joyfully and held out his hand.\
\
\'93Welcome, my quiet one, welcome, my dear, here you are too. I knew you\
would come.\'94\
\
Alyosha went up to him, bowed down before him to the ground and wept.\
Something surged up from his heart, his soul was quivering, he wanted to\
sob.\
\
\'93Come, don\'92t weep over me yet,\'94 Father Zossima smiled, laying his right\
hand on his head. \'93You see I am sitting up talking; maybe I shall live\
another twenty years yet, as that dear good woman from Vishegorye, with\
her little Lizaveta in her arms, wished me yesterday. God bless the mother\
and the little girl Lizaveta,\'94 he crossed himself. \'93Porfiry, did you take\
her offering where I told you?\'94\
\
He meant the sixty copecks brought him the day before by the good\uc0\u8208 humored\
woman to be given \'93to some one poorer than me.\'94 Such offerings, always of\
money gained by personal toil, are made by way of penance voluntarily\
undertaken. The elder had sent Porfiry the evening before to a widow,\
whose house had been burnt down lately, and who after the fire had gone\
with her children begging alms. Porfiry hastened to reply that he had\
given the money, as he had been instructed, \'93from an unknown\
benefactress.\'94\
\
\'93Get up, my dear boy,\'94 the elder went on to Alyosha. \'93Let me look at you.\
Have you been home and seen your brother?\'94 It seemed strange to Alyosha\
that he asked so confidently and precisely, about one of his brothers\
only\'97but which one? Then perhaps he had sent him out both yesterday and\
to\uc0\u8208 day for the sake of that brother.\
\
\'93I have seen one of my brothers,\'94 answered Alyosha.\
\
\'93I mean the elder one, to whom I bowed down.\'94\
\
\'93I only saw him yesterday and could not find him to\uc0\u8208 day,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93Make haste to find him, go again to\uc0\u8208 morrow and make haste, leave\
everything and make haste. Perhaps you may still have time to prevent\
something terrible. I bowed down yesterday to the great suffering in store\
for him.\'94\
\
He was suddenly silent and seemed to be pondering. The words were strange.\
Father Iosif, who had witnessed the scene yesterday, exchanged glances\
with Father Pa\'efssy. Alyosha could not resist asking:\
\
\'93Father and teacher,\'94 he began with extreme emotion, \'93your words are too\
obscure.... What is this suffering in store for him?\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t inquire. I seemed to see something terrible yesterday ... as though\
his whole future were expressed in his eyes. A look came into his eyes\'97so\
that I was instantly horror\uc0\u8208 stricken at what that man is preparing for\
himself. Once or twice in my life I\'92ve seen such a look in a man\'92s face\
... reflecting as it were his future fate, and that fate, alas, came to\
pass. I sent you to him, Alexey, for I thought your brotherly face would\
help him. But everything and all our fates are from the Lord. \'91Except a\
corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it\
die, it bringeth forth much fruit.\'92 Remember that. You, Alexey, I\'92ve many\
times silently blessed for your face, know that,\'94 added the elder with a\
gentle smile. \'93This is what I think of you, you will go forth from these\
walls, but will live like a monk in the world. You will have many enemies,\
but even your foes will love you. Life will bring you many misfortunes,\
but you will find your happiness in them, and will bless life and will\
make others bless it\'97which is what matters most. Well, that is your\
character. Fathers and teachers,\'94 he addressed his friends with a tender\
smile, \'93I have never till to\uc0\u8208 day told even him why the face of this youth\
is so dear to me. Now I will tell you. His face has been as it were a\
remembrance and a prophecy for me. At the dawn of my life when I was a\
child I had an elder brother who died before my eyes at seventeen. And\
later on in the course of my life I gradually became convinced that that\
brother had been for a guidance and a sign from on high for me. For had he\
not come into my life, I should never perhaps, so I fancy at least, have\
become a monk and entered on this precious path. He appeared first to me\
in my childhood, and here, at the end of my pilgrimage, he seems to have\
come to me over again. It is marvelous, fathers and teachers, that Alexey,\
who has some, though not a great, resemblance in face, seems to me so like\
him spiritually, that many times I have taken him for that young man, my\
brother, mysteriously come back to me at the end of my pilgrimage, as a\
reminder and an inspiration. So that I positively wondered at so strange a\
dream in myself. Do you hear this, Porfiry?\'94 he turned to the novice who\
waited on him. \'93Many times I\'92ve seen in your face as it were a look of\
mortification that I love Alexey more than you. Now you know why that was\
so, but I love you too, know that, and many times I grieved at your\
mortification. I should like to tell you, dear friends, of that youth, my\
brother, for there has been no presence in my life more precious, more\
significant and touching. My heart is full of tenderness, and I look at my\
whole life at this moment as though living through it again.\'94\
\
                  \uc0\u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \
\
Here I must observe that this last conversation of Father Zossima with the\
friends who visited him on the last day of his life has been partly\
preserved in writing. Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov wrote it down from\
memory, some time after his elder\'92s death. But whether this was only the\
conversation that took place then, or whether he added to it his notes of\
parts of former conversations with his teacher, I cannot determine. In his\
account, Father Zossima\'92s talk goes on without interruption, as though he\
told his life to his friends in the form of a story, though there is no\
doubt, from other accounts of it, that the conversation that evening was\
general. Though the guests did not interrupt Father Zossima much, yet they\
too talked, perhaps even told something themselves. Besides, Father\
Zossima could not have carried on an uninterrupted narrative, for he was\
sometimes gasping for breath, his voice failed him, and he even lay down\
to rest on his bed, though he did not fall asleep and his visitors did not\
leave their seats. Once or twice the conversation was interrupted by\
Father Pa\'efssy\'92s reading the Gospel. It is worthy of note, too, that no one\
of them supposed that he would die that night, for on that evening of his\
life after his deep sleep in the day he seemed suddenly to have found new\
strength, which kept him up through this long conversation. It was like a\
last effort of love which gave him marvelous energy; only for a little\
time, however, for his life was cut short immediately.... But of that\
later. I will only add now that I have preferred to confine myself to the\
account given by Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov. It will be shorter and not\
so fatiguing, though of course, as I must repeat, Alyosha took a great\
deal from previous conversations and added them to it.\
\
                  \uc0\u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \
\
Notes of the Life of the deceased Priest and Monk, the Elder Zossima,\
taken from his own words by Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov.\
\
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES\
\
_(a)_ _Father Zossima\'92s Brother_\
\
Beloved fathers and teachers, I was born in a distant province in the\
north, in the town of V. My father was a gentleman by birth, but of no\
great consequence or position. He died when I was only two years old, and\
I don\'92t remember him at all. He left my mother a small house built of\
wood, and a fortune, not large, but sufficient to keep her and her\
children in comfort. There were two of us, my elder brother Markel and I.\
He was eight years older than I was, of hasty irritable temperament, but\
kind\uc0\u8208 hearted and never ironical. He was remarkably silent, especially at\
home with me, his mother, and the servants. He did well at school, but did\
not get on with his schoolfellows, though he never quarreled, at least so\
my mother has told me. Six months before his death, when he was seventeen,\
he made friends with a political exile who had been banished from Moscow\
to our town for freethinking, and led a solitary existence there. He was a\
good scholar who had gained distinction in philosophy in the university.\
Something made him take a fancy to Markel, and he used to ask him to see\
him. The young man would spend whole evenings with him during that winter,\
till the exile was summoned to Petersburg to take up his post again at his\
own request, as he had powerful friends.\
\
It was the beginning of Lent, and Markel would not fast, he was rude and\
laughed at it. \'93That\'92s all silly twaddle, and there is no God,\'94 he said,\
horrifying my mother, the servants, and me too. For though I was only\
nine, I too was aghast at hearing such words. We had four servants, all\
serfs. I remember my mother selling one of the four, the cook Afimya, who\
was lame and elderly, for sixty paper roubles, and hiring a free servant\
to take her place.\
\
In the sixth week in Lent, my brother, who was never strong and had a\
tendency to consumption, was taken ill. He was tall but thin and delicate\uc0\u8208 \
looking, and of very pleasing countenance. I suppose he caught cold,\
anyway the doctor, who came, soon whispered to my mother that it was\
galloping consumption, that he would not live through the spring. My\
mother began weeping, and, careful not to alarm my brother, she entreated\
him to go to church, to confess and take the sacrament, as he was still\
able to move about. This made him angry, and he said something profane\
about the church. He grew thoughtful, however; he guessed at once that he\
was seriously ill, and that that was why his mother was begging him to\
confess and take the sacrament. He had been aware, indeed, for a long time\
past, that he was far from well, and had a year before coolly observed at\
dinner to our mother and me, \'93My life won\'92t be long among you, I may not\
live another year,\'94 which seemed now like a prophecy.\
\
Three days passed and Holy Week had come. And on Tuesday morning my\
brother began going to church. \'93I am doing this simply for your sake,\
mother, to please and comfort you,\'94 he said. My mother wept with joy and\
grief. \'93His end must be near,\'94 she thought, \'93if there\'92s such a change in\
him.\'94 But he was not able to go to church long, he took to his bed, so he\
had to confess and take the sacrament at home.\
\
It was a late Easter, and the days were bright, fine, and full of\
fragrance. I remember he used to cough all night and sleep badly, but in\
the morning he dressed and tried to sit up in an arm\uc0\u8208 chair. That\'92s how I\
remember him sitting, sweet and gentle, smiling, his face bright and\
joyous, in spite of his illness. A marvelous change passed over him, his\
spirit seemed transformed. The old nurse would come in and say, \'93Let me\
light the lamp before the holy image, my dear.\'94 And once he would not have\
allowed it and would have blown it out.\
\
\'93Light it, light it, dear, I was a wretch to have prevented you doing it.\
You are praying when you light the lamp, and I am praying when I rejoice\
seeing you. So we are praying to the same God.\'94\
\
Those words seemed strange to us, and mother would go to her room and\
weep, but when she went in to him she wiped her eyes and looked cheerful.\
\'93Mother, don\'92t weep, darling,\'94 he would say, \'93I\'92ve long to live yet, long\
to rejoice with you, and life is glad and joyful.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, dear boy, how can you talk of joy when you lie feverish at night,\
coughing as though you would tear yourself to pieces.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t cry, mother,\'94 he would answer, \'93life is paradise, and we are all in\
paradise, but we won\'92t see it, if we would, we should have heaven on earth\
the next day.\'94\
\
Every one wondered at his words, he spoke so strangely and positively; we\
were all touched and wept. Friends came to see us. \'93Dear ones,\'94 he would\
say to them, \'93what have I done that you should love me so, how can you\
love any one like me, and how was it I did not know, I did not appreciate\
it before?\'94\
\
When the servants came in to him he would say continually, \'93Dear, kind\
people, why are you doing so much for me, do I deserve to be waited on? If\
it were God\'92s will for me to live, I would wait on you, for all men should\
wait on one another.\'94\
\
Mother shook her head as she listened. \'93My darling, it\'92s your illness\
makes you talk like that.\'94\
\
\'93Mother, darling,\'94 he would say, \'93there must be servants and masters, but\
if so I will be the servant of my servants, the same as they are to me.\
And another thing, mother, every one of us has sinned against all men, and\
I more than any.\'94\
\
Mother positively smiled at that, smiled through her tears. \'93Why, how\
could you have sinned against all men, more than all? Robbers and\
murderers have done that, but what sin have you committed yet, that you\
hold yourself more guilty than all?\'94\
\
\'93Mother, little heart of mine,\'94 he said (he had begun using such strange\
caressing words at that time), \'93little heart of mine, my joy, believe me,\
every one is really responsible to all men for all men and for everything.\
I don\'92t know how to explain it to you, but I feel it is so, painfully\
even. And how is it we went on then living, getting angry and not\
knowing?\'94\
\
So he would get up every day, more and more sweet and joyous and full of\
love. When the doctor, an old German called Eisenschmidt, came:\
\
\'93Well, doctor, have I another day in this world?\'94 he would ask, joking.\
\
\'93You\'92ll live many days yet,\'94 the doctor would answer, \'93and months and\
years too.\'94\
\
\'93Months and years!\'94 he would exclaim. \'93Why reckon the days? One day is\
enough for a man to know all happiness. My dear ones, why do we quarrel,\
try to outshine each other and keep grudges against each other? Let\'92s go\
straight into the garden, walk and play there, love, appreciate, and kiss\
each other, and glorify life.\'94\
\
\'93Your son cannot last long,\'94 the doctor told my mother, as she accompanied\
him to the door. \'93The disease is affecting his brain.\'94\
\
The windows of his room looked out into the garden, and our garden was a\
shady one, with old trees in it which were coming into bud. The first\
birds of spring were flitting in the branches, chirruping and singing at\
the windows. And looking at them and admiring them, he began suddenly\
begging their forgiveness too: \'93Birds of heaven, happy birds, forgive me,\
for I have sinned against you too.\'94 None of us could understand that at\
the time, but he shed tears of joy. \'93Yes,\'94 he said, \'93there was such a\
glory of God all about me: birds, trees, meadows, sky; only I lived in\
shame and dishonored it all and did not notice the beauty and glory.\'94\
\
\'93You take too many sins on yourself,\'94 mother used to say, weeping.\
\
\'93Mother, darling, it\'92s for joy, not for grief I am crying. Though I can\'92t\
explain it to you, I like to humble myself before them, for I don\'92t know\
how to love them enough. If I have sinned against every one, yet all\
forgive me, too, and that\'92s heaven. Am I not in heaven now?\'94\
\
And there was a great deal more I don\'92t remember. I remember I went once\
into his room when there was no one else there. It was a bright evening,\
the sun was setting, and the whole room was lighted up. He beckoned me,\
and I went up to him. He put his hands on my shoulders and looked into my\
face tenderly, lovingly; he said nothing for a minute, only looked at me\
like that.\
\
\'93Well,\'94 he said, \'93run and play now, enjoy life for me too.\'94\
\
I went out then and ran to play. And many times in my life afterwards I\
remembered even with tears how he told me to enjoy life for him too. There\
were many other marvelous and beautiful sayings of his, though we did not\
understand them at the time. He died the third week after Easter. He was\
fully conscious though he could not talk; up to his last hour he did not\
change. He looked happy, his eyes beamed and sought us, he smiled at us,\
beckoned us. There was a great deal of talk even in the town about his\
death. I was impressed by all this at the time, but not too much so,\
though I cried a good deal at his funeral. I was young then, a child, but\
a lasting impression, a hidden feeling of it all, remained in my heart,\
ready to rise up and respond when the time came. So indeed it happened.\
\
_(b) Of the Holy Scriptures in the Life of Father Zossima_\
\
I was left alone with my mother. Her friends began advising her to send me\
to Petersburg as other parents did. \'93You have only one son now,\'94 they\
said, \'93and have a fair income, and you will be depriving him perhaps of a\
brilliant career if you keep him here.\'94 They suggested I should be sent to\
Petersburg to the Cadet Corps, that I might afterwards enter the Imperial\
Guard. My mother hesitated for a long time, it was awful to part with her\
only child, but she made up her mind to it at last, though not without\
many tears, believing she was acting for my happiness. She brought me to\
Petersburg and put me into the Cadet Corps, and I never saw her again. For\
she too died three years afterwards. She spent those three years mourning\
and grieving for both of us.\
\
From the house of my childhood I have brought nothing but precious\
memories, for there are no memories more precious than those of early\
childhood in one\'92s first home. And that is almost always so if there is\
any love and harmony in the family at all. Indeed, precious memories may\
remain even of a bad home, if only the heart knows how to find what is\
precious. With my memories of home I count, too, my memories of the Bible,\
which, child as I was, I was very eager to read at home. I had a book of\
Scripture history then with excellent pictures, called _A Hundred and Four\
Stories from the Old and New Testament_, and I learned to read from it. I\
have it lying on my shelf now, I keep it as a precious relic of the past.\
But even before I learned to read, I remember first being moved to\
devotional feeling at eight years old. My mother took me alone to mass (I\
don\'92t remember where my brother was at the time) on the Monday before\
Easter. It was a fine day, and I remember to\uc0\u8208 day, as though I saw it now,\
how the incense rose from the censer and softly floated upwards and,\
overhead in the cupola, mingled in rising waves with the sunlight that\
streamed in at the little window. I was stirred by the sight, and for the\
first time in my life I consciously received the seed of God\'92s word in my\
heart. A youth came out into the middle of the church carrying a big book,\
so large that at the time I fancied he could scarcely carry it. He laid it\
on the reading desk, opened it, and began reading, and suddenly for the\
first time I understood something read in the church of God. In the land\
of Uz, there lived a man, righteous and God\uc0\u8208 fearing, and he had great\
wealth, so many camels, so many sheep and asses, and his children feasted,\
and he loved them very much and prayed for them. \'93It may be that my sons\
have sinned in their feasting.\'94 Now the devil came before the Lord\
together with the sons of God, and said to the Lord that he had gone up\
and down the earth and under the earth. \'93And hast thou considered my\
servant Job?\'94 God asked of him. And God boasted to the devil, pointing to\
his great and holy servant. And the devil laughed at God\'92s words. \'93Give\
him over to me and Thou wilt see that Thy servant will murmur against Thee\
and curse Thy name.\'94 And God gave up the just man He loved so, to the\
devil. And the devil smote his children and his cattle and scattered his\
wealth, all of a sudden like a thunderbolt from heaven. And Job rent his\
mantle and fell down upon the ground and cried aloud, \'93Naked came I out of\
my mother\'92s womb, and naked shall I return into the earth; the Lord gave\
and the Lord has taken away. Blessed be the name of the Lord for ever and\
ever.\'94\
\
Fathers and teachers, forgive my tears now, for all my childhood rises up\
again before me, and I breathe now as I breathed then, with the breast of\
a little child of eight, and I feel as I did then, awe and wonder and\
gladness. The camels at that time caught my imagination, and Satan, who\
talked like that with God, and God who gave His servant up to destruction,\
and His servant crying out: \'93Blessed be Thy name although Thou dost punish\
me,\'94 and then the soft and sweet singing in the church: \'93Let my prayer\
rise up before Thee,\'94 and again incense from the priest\'92s censer and the\
kneeling and the prayer. Ever since then\'97only yesterday I took it up\'97I\'92ve\
never been able to read that sacred tale without tears. And how much that\
is great, mysterious and unfathomable there is in it! Afterwards I heard\
the words of mockery and blame, proud words, \'93How could God give up the\
most loved of His saints for the diversion of the devil, take from him his\
children, smite him with sore boils so that he cleansed the corruption\
from his sores with a pot\uc0\u8208 sherd\'97and for no object except to boast to the\
devil! \'91See what My saint can suffer for My sake.\'92 \'94 But the greatness of\
it lies just in the fact that it is a mystery\'97that the passing earthly\
show and the eternal verity are brought together in it. In the face of the\
earthly truth, the eternal truth is accomplished. The Creator, just as on\
the first days of creation He ended each day with praise: \'93That is good\
that I have created,\'94 looks upon Job and again praises His creation. And\
Job, praising the Lord, serves not only Him but all His creation for\
generations and generations, and for ever and ever, since for that he was\
ordained. Good heavens, what a book it is, and what lessons there are in\
it! What a book the Bible is, what a miracle, what strength is given with\
it to man! It is like a mold cast of the world and man and human nature,\
everything is there, and a law for everything for all the ages. And what\
mysteries are solved and revealed! God raises Job again, gives him wealth\
again. Many years pass by, and he has other children and loves them. But\
how could he love those new ones when those first children are no more,\
when he has lost them? Remembering them, how could he be fully happy with\
those new ones, however dear the new ones might be? But he could, he\
could. It\'92s the great mystery of human life that old grief passes\
gradually into quiet, tender joy. The mild serenity of age takes the place\
of the riotous blood of youth. I bless the rising sun each day, and, as\
before, my hearts sings to meet it, but now I love even more its setting,\
its long slanting rays and the soft, tender, gentle memories that come\
with them, the dear images from the whole of my long, happy life\'97and over\
all the Divine Truth, softening, reconciling, forgiving! My life is\
ending, I know that well, but every day that is left me I feel how my\
earthly life is in touch with a new infinite, unknown, that approaching\
life, the nearness of which sets my soul quivering with rapture, my mind\
glowing and my heart weeping with joy.\
\
Friends and teachers, I have heard more than once, and of late one may\
hear it more often, that the priests, and above all the village priests,\
are complaining on all sides of their miserable income and their\
humiliating lot. They plainly state, even in print\'97I\'92ve read it\
myself\'97that they are unable to teach the Scriptures to the people because\
of the smallness of their means, and if Lutherans and heretics come and\
lead the flock astray, they let them lead them astray because they have so\
little to live upon. May the Lord increase the sustenance that is so\
precious to them, for their complaint is just, too. But of a truth I say,\
if any one is to blame in the matter, half the fault is ours. For he may\
be short of time, he may say truly that he is overwhelmed all the while\
with work and services, but still it\'92s not all the time, even he has an\
hour a week to remember God. And he does not work the whole year round.\
Let him gather round him once a week, some hour in the evening, if only\
the children at first\'97the fathers will hear of it and they too will begin\
to come. There\'92s no need to build halls for this, let him take them into\
his own cottage. They won\'92t spoil his cottage, they would only be there\
one hour. Let him open that book and begin reading it without grand words\
or superciliousness, without condescension to them, but gently and kindly,\
being glad that he is reading to them and that they are listening with\
attention, loving the words himself, only stopping from time to time to\
explain words that are not understood by the peasants. Don\'92t be anxious,\
they will understand everything, the orthodox heart will understand all!\
Let him read them about Abraham and Sarah, about Isaac and Rebecca, of how\
Jacob went to Laban and wrestled with the Lord in his dream and said,\
\'93This place is holy\'94\'97and he will impress the devout mind of the peasant.\
Let him read, especially to the children, how the brothers sold Joseph,\
the tender boy, the dreamer and prophet, into bondage, and told their\
father that a wild beast had devoured him, and showed him his blood\uc0\u8208 \
stained clothes. Let him read them how the brothers afterwards journeyed\
into Egypt for corn, and Joseph, already a great ruler, unrecognized by\
them, tormented them, accused them, kept his brother Benjamin, and all\
through love: \'93I love you, and loving you I torment you.\'94 For he\
remembered all his life how they had sold him to the merchants in the\
burning desert by the well, and how, wringing his hands, he had wept and\
besought his brothers not to sell him as a slave in a strange land. And\
how, seeing them again after many years, he loved them beyond measure, but\
he harassed and tormented them in love. He left them at last not able to\
bear the suffering of his heart, flung himself on his bed and wept. Then,\
wiping his tears away, he went out to them joyful and told them,\
\'93Brothers, I am your brother Joseph!\'94 Let him read them further how happy\
old Jacob was on learning that his darling boy was still alive, and how he\
went to Egypt leaving his own country, and died in a foreign land,\
bequeathing his great prophecy that had lain mysteriously hidden in his\
meek and timid heart all his life, that from his offspring, from Judah,\
will come the great hope of the world, the Messiah and Saviour.\
\
Fathers and teachers, forgive me and don\'92t be angry, that like a little\
child I\'92ve been babbling of what you know long ago, and can teach me a\
hundred times more skillfully. I only speak from rapture, and forgive my\
tears, for I love the Bible. Let him too weep, the priest of God, and be\
sure that the hearts of his listeners will throb in response. Only a\
little tiny seed is needed\'97drop it into the heart of the peasant and it\
won\'92t die, it will live in his soul all his life, it will be hidden in the\
midst of his darkness and sin, like a bright spot, like a great reminder.\
And there\'92s no need of much teaching or explanation, he will understand it\
all simply. Do you suppose that the peasants don\'92t understand? Try reading\
them the touching story of the fair Esther and the haughty Vashti; or the\
miraculous story of Jonah in the whale. Don\'92t forget either the parables\
of Our Lord, choose especially from the Gospel of St. Luke (that is what I\
did), and then from the Acts of the Apostles the conversion of St. Paul\
(that you mustn\'92t leave out on any account), and from the _Lives of the\
Saints_, for instance, the life of Alexey, the man of God and, greatest of\
all, the happy martyr and the seer of God, Mary of Egypt\'97and you will\
penetrate their hearts with these simple tales. Give one hour a week to it\
in spite of your poverty, only one little hour. And you will see for\
yourselves that our people is gracious and grateful, and will repay you a\
hundred\uc0\u8208 fold. Mindful of the kindness of their priest and the moving words\
they have heard from him, they will of their own accord help him in his\
fields and in his house, and will treat him with more respect than\
before\'97so that it will even increase his worldly well\uc0\u8208 being too. The thing\
is so simple that sometimes one is even afraid to put it into words, for\
fear of being laughed at, and yet how true it is! One who does not believe\
in God will not believe in God\'92s people. He who believes in God\'92s people\
will see His Holiness too, even though he had not believed in it till\
then. Only the people and their future spiritual power will convert our\
atheists, who have torn themselves away from their native soil.\
\
And what is the use of Christ\'92s words, unless we set an example? The\
people is lost without the Word of God, for its soul is athirst for the\
Word and for all that is good.\
\
In my youth, long ago, nearly forty years ago, I traveled all over Russia\
with Father Anfim, collecting funds for our monastery, and we stayed one\
night on the bank of a great navigable river with some fishermen. A good\uc0\u8208 \
looking peasant lad, about eighteen, joined us; he had to hurry back next\
morning to pull a merchant\'92s barge along the bank. I noticed him looking\
straight before him with clear and tender eyes. It was a bright, warm,\
still, July night, a cool mist rose from the broad river, we could hear\
the plash of a fish, the birds were still, all was hushed and beautiful,\
everything praying to God. Only we two were not sleeping, the lad and I,\
and we talked of the beauty of this world of God\'92s and of the great\
mystery of it. Every blade of grass, every insect, ant, and golden bee,\
all so marvelously know their path, though they have not intelligence,\
they bear witness to the mystery of God and continually accomplish it\
themselves. I saw the dear lad\'92s heart was moved. He told me that he loved\
the forest and the forest birds. He was a bird\uc0\u8208 catcher, knew the note of\
each of them, could call each bird. \'93I know nothing better than to be in\
the forest,\'94 said he, \'93though all things are good.\'94\
\
\'93Truly,\'94 I answered him, \'93all things are good and fair, because all is\
truth. Look,\'94 said I, \'93at the horse, that great beast that is so near to\
man; or the lowly, pensive ox, which feeds him and works for him; look at\
their faces, what meekness, what devotion to man, who often beats them\
mercilessly. What gentleness, what confidence and what beauty! It\'92s\
touching to know that there\'92s no sin in them, for all, all except man, is\
sinless, and Christ has been with them before us.\'94\
\
\'93Why,\'94 asked the boy, \'93is Christ with them too?\'94\
\
\'93It cannot but be so,\'94 said I, \'93since the Word is for all. All creation\
and all creatures, every leaf is striving to the Word, singing glory to\
God, weeping to Christ, unconsciously accomplishing this by the mystery of\
their sinless life. Yonder,\'94 said I, \'93in the forest wanders the dreadful\
bear, fierce and menacing, and yet innocent in it.\'94 And I told him how\
once a bear came to a great saint who had taken refuge in a tiny cell in\
the wood. And the great saint pitied him, went up to him without fear and\
gave him a piece of bread. \'93Go along,\'94 said he, \'93Christ be with you,\'94 and\
the savage beast walked away meekly and obediently, doing no harm. And the\
lad was delighted that the bear had walked away without hurting the saint,\
and that Christ was with him too. \'93Ah,\'94 said he, \'93how good that is, how\
good and beautiful is all God\'92s work!\'94 He sat musing softly and sweetly. I\
saw he understood. And he slept beside me a light and sinless sleep. May\
God bless youth! And I prayed for him as I went to sleep. Lord, send peace\
and light to Thy people!\
\
\
\
Chapter II. The Duel\
\
\
_(c) Recollections of Father Zossima\'92s Youth before he became a Monk. The\
Duel_\
\
I spent a long time, almost eight years, in the military cadet school at\
Petersburg, and in the novelty of my surroundings there, many of my\
childish impressions grew dimmer, though I forgot nothing. I picked up so\
many new habits and opinions that I was transformed into a cruel, absurd,\
almost savage creature. A surface polish of courtesy and society manners I\
did acquire together with the French language.\
\
But we all, myself included, looked upon the soldiers in our service as\
cattle. I was perhaps worse than the rest in that respect, for I was so\
much more impressionable than my companions. By the time we left the\
school as officers, we were ready to lay down our lives for the honor of\
the regiment, but no one of us had any knowledge of the real meaning of\
honor, and if any one had known it, he would have been the first to\
ridicule it. Drunkenness, debauchery and devilry were what we almost\
prided ourselves on. I don\'92t say that we were bad by nature, all these\
young men were good fellows, but they behaved badly, and I worst of all.\
What made it worse for me was that I had come into my own money, and so I\
flung myself into a life of pleasure, and plunged headlong into all the\
recklessness of youth.\
\
I was fond of reading, yet strange to say, the Bible was the one book I\
never opened at that time, though I always carried it about with me, and I\
was never separated from it; in very truth I was keeping that book \'93for\
the day and the hour, for the month and the year,\'94 though I knew it not.\
\
After four years of this life, I chanced to be in the town of K. where our\
regiment was stationed at the time. We found the people of the town\
hospitable, rich and fond of entertainments. I met with a cordial\
reception everywhere, as I was of a lively temperament and was known to be\
well off, which always goes a long way in the world. And then a\
circumstance happened which was the beginning of it all.\
\
I formed an attachment to a beautiful and intelligent young girl of noble\
and lofty character, the daughter of people much respected. They were\
well\uc0\u8208 to\u8208 do people of influence and position. They always gave me a cordial\
and friendly reception. I fancied that the young lady looked on me with\
favor and my heart was aflame at such an idea. Later on I saw and fully\
realized that I perhaps was not so passionately in love with her at all,\
but only recognized the elevation of her mind and character, which I could\
not indeed have helped doing. I was prevented, however, from making her an\
offer at the time by my selfishness, I was loath to part with the\
allurements of my free and licentious bachelor life in the heyday of my\
youth, and with my pockets full of money. I did drop some hint as to my\
feelings however, though I put off taking any decisive step for a time.\
Then, all of a sudden, we were ordered off for two months to another\
district.\
\
On my return two months later, I found the young lady already married to a\
rich neighboring landowner, a very amiable man, still young though older\
than I was, connected with the best Petersburg society, which I was not,\
and of excellent education, which I also was not. I was so overwhelmed at\
this unexpected circumstance that my mind was positively clouded. The\
worst of it all was that, as I learned then, the young landowner had been\
a long while betrothed to her, and I had met him indeed many times in her\
house, but blinded by my conceit I had noticed nothing. And this\
particularly mortified me; almost everybody had known all about it, while\
I knew nothing. I was filled with sudden irrepressible fury. With flushed\
face I began recalling how often I had been on the point of declaring my\
love to her, and as she had not attempted to stop me or to warn me, she\
must, I concluded, have been laughing at me all the time. Later on, of\
course, I reflected and remembered that she had been very far from\
laughing at me; on the contrary, she used to turn off any love\uc0\u8208 making on\
my part with a jest and begin talking of other subjects; but at that\
moment I was incapable of reflecting and was all eagerness for revenge. I\
am surprised to remember that my wrath and revengeful feelings were\
extremely repugnant to my own nature, for being of an easy temper, I found\
it difficult to be angry with any one for long, and so I had to work\
myself up artificially and became at last revolting and absurd.\
\
I waited for an opportunity and succeeded in insulting my \'93rival\'94 in the\
presence of a large company. I insulted him on a perfectly extraneous\
pretext, jeering at his opinion upon an important public event\'97it was in\
the year 1826(5)\'97and my jeer was, so people said, clever and effective.\
Then I forced him to ask for an explanation, and behaved so rudely that he\
accepted my challenge in spite of the vast inequality between us, as I was\
younger, a person of no consequence, and of inferior rank. I learned\
afterwards for a fact that it was from a jealous feeling on his side also\
that my challenge was accepted; he had been rather jealous of me on his\
wife\'92s account before their marriage; he fancied now that if he submitted\
to be insulted by me and refused to accept my challenge, and if she heard\
of it, she might begin to despise him and waver in her love for him. I\
soon found a second in a comrade, an ensign of our regiment. In those days\
though duels were severely punished, yet dueling was a kind of fashion\
among the officers\'97so strong and deeply rooted will a brutal prejudice\
sometimes be.\
\
It was the end of June, and our meeting was to take place at seven o\'92clock\
the next day on the outskirts of the town\'97and then something happened that\
in very truth was the turning\uc0\u8208 point of my life. In the evening, returning\
home in a savage and brutal humor, I flew into a rage with my orderly\
Afanasy, and gave him two blows in the face with all my might, so that it\
was covered with blood. He had not long been in my service and I had\
struck him before, but never with such ferocious cruelty. And, believe me,\
though it\'92s forty years ago, I recall it now with shame and pain. I went\
to bed and slept for about three hours; when I waked up the day was\
breaking. I got up\'97I did not want to sleep any more\'97I went to the\
window\'97opened it, it looked out upon the garden; I saw the sun rising; it\
was warm and beautiful, the birds were singing.\
\
\'93What\'92s the meaning of it?\'94 I thought. \'93I feel in my heart as it were\
something vile and shameful. Is it because I am going to shed blood? No,\'94\
I thought, \'93I feel it\'92s not that. Can it be that I am afraid of death,\
afraid of being killed? No, that\'92s not it, that\'92s not it at all.\'94... And\
all at once I knew what it was: it was because I had beaten Afanasy the\
evening before! It all rose before my mind, it all was as it were repeated\
over again; he stood before me and I was beating him straight on the face\
and he was holding his arms stiffly down, his head erect, his eyes fixed\
upon me as though on parade. He staggered at every blow and did not even\
dare to raise his hands to protect himself. That is what a man has been\
brought to, and that was a man beating a fellow creature! What a crime! It\
was as though a sharp dagger had pierced me right through. I stood as if I\
were struck dumb, while the sun was shining, the leaves were rejoicing and\
the birds were trilling the praise of God.... I hid my face in my hands,\
fell on my bed and broke into a storm of tears. And then I remembered my\
brother Markel and what he said on his death\uc0\u8208 bed to his servants: \'93My dear\
ones, why do you wait on me, why do you love me, am I worth your waiting\
on me?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, am I worth it?\'94 flashed through my mind. \'93After all what am I worth,\
that another man, a fellow creature, made in the likeness and image of\
God, should serve me?\'94 For the first time in my life this question forced\
itself upon me. He had said, \'93Mother, my little heart, in truth we are\
each responsible to all for all, it\'92s only that men don\'92t know this. If\
they knew it, the world would be a paradise at once.\'94\
\
\'93God, can that too be false?\'94 I thought as I wept. \'93In truth, perhaps, I\
am more than all others responsible for all, a greater sinner than all men\
in the world.\'94 And all at once the whole truth in its full light appeared\
to me; what was I going to do? I was going to kill a good, clever, noble\
man, who had done me no wrong, and by depriving his wife of happiness for\
the rest of her life, I should be torturing and killing her too. I lay\
thus in my bed with my face in the pillow, heedless how the time was\
passing. Suddenly my second, the ensign, came in with the pistols to fetch\
me.\
\
\'93Ah,\'94 said he, \'93it\'92s a good thing you are up already, it\'92s time we were\
off, come along!\'94\
\
I did not know what to do and hurried to and fro undecided; we went out to\
the carriage, however.\
\
\'93Wait here a minute,\'94 I said to him. \'93I\'92ll be back directly, I have\
forgotten my purse.\'94\
\
And I ran back alone, to Afanasy\'92s little room.\
\
\'93Afanasy,\'94 I said, \'93I gave you two blows on the face yesterday, forgive\
me,\'94 I said.\
\
He started as though he were frightened, and looked at me; and I saw that\
it was not enough, and on the spot, in my full officer\'92s uniform, I\
dropped at his feet and bowed my head to the ground.\
\
\'93Forgive me,\'94 I said.\
\
Then he was completely aghast.\
\
\'93Your honor ... sir, what are you doing? Am I worth it?\'94\
\
And he burst out crying as I had done before, hid this face in his hands,\
turned to the window and shook all over with his sobs. I flew out to my\
comrade and jumped into the carriage.\
\
\'93Ready,\'94 I cried. \'93Have you ever seen a conqueror?\'94 I asked him. \'93Here is\
one before you.\'94\
\
I was in ecstasy, laughing and talking all the way, I don\'92t remember what\
about.\
\
He looked at me. \'93Well, brother, you are a plucky fellow, you\'92ll keep up\
the honor of the uniform, I can see.\'94\
\
So we reached the place and found them there, waiting us. We were placed\
twelve paces apart; he had the first shot. I stood gayly, looking him full\
in the face; I did not twitch an eyelash, I looked lovingly at him, for I\
knew what I would do. His shot just grazed my cheek and ear.\
\
\'93Thank God,\'94 I cried, \'93no man has been killed,\'94 and I seized my pistol,\
turned back and flung it far away into the wood. \'93That\'92s the place for\
you,\'94 I cried.\
\
I turned to my adversary.\
\
\'93Forgive me, young fool that I am, sir,\'94 I said, \'93for my unprovoked insult\
to you and for forcing you to fire at me. I am ten times worse than you\
and more, maybe. Tell that to the person whom you hold dearest in the\
world.\'94\
\
I had no sooner said this than they all three shouted at me.\
\
\'93Upon my word,\'94 cried my adversary, annoyed, \'93if you did not want to\
fight, why did not you let me alone?\'94\
\
\'93Yesterday I was a fool, to\uc0\u8208 day I know better,\'94 I answered him gayly.\
\
\'93As to yesterday, I believe you, but as for to\uc0\u8208 day, it is difficult to\
agree with your opinion,\'94 said he.\
\
\'93Bravo,\'94 I cried, clapping my hands. \'93I agree with you there too. I have\
deserved it!\'94\
\
\'93Will you shoot, sir, or not?\'94\
\
\'93No, I won\'92t,\'94 I said; \'93if you like, fire at me again, but it would be\
better for you not to fire.\'94\
\
The seconds, especially mine, were shouting too: \'93Can you disgrace the\
regiment like this, facing your antagonist and begging his forgiveness! If\
I\'92d only known this!\'94\
\
I stood facing them all, not laughing now.\
\
\'93Gentlemen,\'94 I said, \'93is it really so wonderful in these days to find a\
man who can repent of his stupidity and publicly confess his wrongdoing?\'94\
\
\'93But not in a duel,\'94 cried my second again.\
\
\'93That\'92s what\'92s so strange,\'94 I said. \'93For I ought to have owned my fault as\
soon as I got here, before he had fired a shot, before leading him into a\
great and deadly sin; but we have made our life so grotesque, that to act\
in that way would have been almost impossible, for only after I have faced\
his shot at the distance of twelve paces could my words have any\
significance for him, and if I had spoken before, he would have said, \'91He\
is a coward, the sight of the pistols has frightened him, no use to listen\
to him.\'92 Gentlemen,\'94 I cried suddenly, speaking straight from my heart,\
\'93look around you at the gifts of God, the clear sky, the pure air, the\
tender grass, the birds; nature is beautiful and sinless, and we, only we,\
are sinful and foolish, and we don\'92t understand that life is heaven, for\
we have only to understand that and it will at once be fulfilled in all\
its beauty, we shall embrace each other and weep.\'94\
\
I would have said more but I could not; my voice broke with the sweetness\
and youthful gladness of it, and there was such bliss in my heart as I had\
never known before in my life.\
\
\'93All this as rational and edifying,\'94 said my antagonist, \'93and in any case\
you are an original person.\'94\
\
\'93You may laugh,\'94 I said to him, laughing too, \'93but afterwards you will\
approve of me.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I am ready to approve of you now,\'94 said he; \'93will you shake hands?\
for I believe you are genuinely sincere.\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 I said, \'93not now, later on when I have grown worthier and deserve\
your esteem, then shake hands and you will do well.\'94\
\
We went home, my second upbraiding me all the way, while I kissed him. All\
my comrades heard of the affair at once and gathered together to pass\
judgment on me the same day.\
\
\'93He has disgraced the uniform,\'94 they said; \'93let him resign his\
commission.\'94\
\
Some stood up for me: \'93He faced the shot,\'94 they said.\
\
\'93Yes, but he was afraid of his other shot and begged for forgiveness.\'94\
\
\'93If he had been afraid of being shot, he would have shot his own pistol\
first before asking forgiveness, while he flung it loaded into the forest.\
No, there\'92s something else in this, something original.\'94\
\
I enjoyed listening and looking at them. \'93My dear friends and comrades,\'94\
said I, \'93don\'92t worry about my resigning my commission, for I have done so\
already. I have sent in my papers this morning and as soon as I get my\
discharge I shall go into a monastery\'97it\'92s with that object I am leaving\
the regiment.\'94\
\
When I had said this every one of them burst out laughing.\
\
\'93You should have told us of that first, that explains everything, we can\'92t\
judge a monk.\'94\
\
They laughed and could not stop themselves, and not scornfully, but kindly\
and merrily. They all felt friendly to me at once, even those who had been\
sternest in their censure, and all the following month, before my\
discharge came, they could not make enough of me. \'93Ah, you monk,\'94 they\
would say. And every one said something kind to me, they began trying to\
dissuade me, even to pity me: \'93What are you doing to yourself?\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 they would say, \'93he is a brave fellow, he faced fire and could have\
fired his own pistol too, but he had a dream the night before that he\
should become a monk, that\'92s why he did it.\'94\
\
It was the same thing with the society of the town. Till then I had been\
kindly received, but had not been the object of special attention, and now\
all came to know me at once and invited me; they laughed at me, but they\
loved me. I may mention that although everybody talked openly of our duel,\
the authorities took no notice of it, because my antagonist was a near\
relation of our general, and as there had been no bloodshed and no serious\
consequences, and as I resigned my commission, they took it as a joke. And\
I began then to speak aloud and fearlessly, regardless of their laughter,\
for it was always kindly and not spiteful laughter. These conversations\
mostly took place in the evenings, in the company of ladies; women\
particularly liked listening to me then and they made the men listen.\
\
\'93But how can I possibly be responsible for all?\'94 every one would laugh in\
my face. \'93Can I, for instance, be responsible for you?\'94\
\
\'93You may well not know it,\'94 I would answer, \'93since the whole world has\
long been going on a different line, since we consider the veriest lies as\
truth and demand the same lies from others. Here I have for once in my\
life acted sincerely and, well, you all look upon me as a madman. Though\
you are friendly to me, yet, you see, you all laugh at me.\'94\
\
\'93But how can we help being friendly to you?\'94 said my hostess, laughing.\
The room was full of people. All of a sudden the young lady rose, on whose\
account the duel had been fought and whom only lately I had intended to be\
my future wife. I had not noticed her coming into the room. She got up,\
came to me and held out her hand.\
\
\'93Let me tell you,\'94 she said, \'93that I am the first not to laugh at you, but\
on the contrary I thank you with tears and express my respect for you for\
your action then.\'94\
\
Her husband, too, came up and then they all approached me and almost\
kissed me. My heart was filled with joy, but my attention was especially\
caught by a middle\uc0\u8208 aged man who came up to me with the others. I knew him\
by name already, but had never made his acquaintance nor exchanged a word\
with him till that evening.\
\
_(d) The Mysterious Visitor_\
\
He had long been an official in the town; he was in a prominent position,\
respected by all, rich and had a reputation for benevolence. He subscribed\
considerable sums to the almshouse and the orphan asylum; he was very\
charitable, too, in secret, a fact which only became known after his\
death. He was a man of about fifty, almost stern in appearance and not\
much given to conversation. He had been married about ten years and his\
wife, who was still young, had borne him three children. Well, I was\
sitting alone in my room the following evening, when my door suddenly\
opened and this gentleman walked in.\
\
I must mention, by the way, that I was no longer living in my former\
quarters. As soon as I resigned my commission, I took rooms with an old\
lady, the widow of a government clerk. My landlady\'92s servant waited upon\
me, for I had moved into her rooms simply because on my return from the\
duel I had sent Afanasy back to the regiment, as I felt ashamed to look\
him in the face after my last interview with him. So prone is the man of\
the world to be ashamed of any righteous action.\
\
\'93I have,\'94 said my visitor, \'93with great interest listened to you speaking\
in different houses the last few days and I wanted at last to make your\
personal acquaintance, so as to talk to you more intimately. Can you, dear\
sir, grant me this favor?\'94\
\
\'93I can, with the greatest pleasure, and I shall look upon it as an honor.\'94\
I said this, though I felt almost dismayed, so greatly was I impressed\
from the first moment by the appearance of this man. For though other\
people had listened to me with interest and attention, no one had come to\
me before with such a serious, stern and concentrated expression. And now\
he had come to see me in my own rooms. He sat down.\
\
\'93You are, I see, a man of great strength of character,\'94 he said; \'93as you\
have dared to serve the truth, even when by doing so you risked incurring\
the contempt of all.\'94\
\
\'93Your praise is, perhaps, excessive,\'94 I replied.\
\
\'93No, it\'92s not excessive,\'94 he answered; \'93believe me, such a course of\
action is far more difficult than you think. It is that which has\
impressed me, and it is only on that account that I have come to you,\'94 he\
continued. \'93Tell me, please, that is if you are not annoyed by my perhaps\
unseemly curiosity, what were your exact sensations, if you can recall\
them, at the moment when you made up your mind to ask forgiveness at the\
duel. Do not think my question frivolous; on the contrary, I have in\
asking the question a secret motive of my own, which I will perhaps\
explain to you later on, if it is God\'92s will that we should become more\
intimately acquainted.\'94\
\
All the while he was speaking, I was looking at him straight into the face\
and I felt all at once a complete trust in him and great curiosity on my\
side also, for I felt that there was some strange secret in his soul.\
\
\'93You ask what were my exact sensations at the moment when I asked my\
opponent\'92s forgiveness,\'94 I answered; \'93but I had better tell you from the\
beginning what I have not yet told any one else.\'94 And I described all that\
had passed between Afanasy and me, and how I had bowed down to the ground\
at his feet. \'93From that you can see for yourself,\'94 I concluded, \'93that at\
the time of the duel it was easier for me, for I had made a beginning\
already at home, and when once I had started on that road, to go farther\
along it was far from being difficult, but became a source of joy and\
happiness.\'94\
\
I liked the way he looked at me as he listened. \'93All that,\'94 he said, \'93is\
exceedingly interesting. I will come to see you again and again.\'94\
\
And from that time forth he came to see me nearly every evening. And we\
should have become greater friends, if only he had ever talked of himself.\
But about himself he scarcely ever said a word, yet continually asked me\
about myself. In spite of that I became very fond of him and spoke with\
perfect frankness to him about all my feelings; \'93for,\'94 thought I, \'93what\
need have I to know his secrets, since I can see without that that he is a\
good man? Moreover, though he is such a serious man and my senior, he\
comes to see a youngster like me and treats me as his equal.\'94 And I\
learned a great deal that was profitable from him, for he was a man of\
lofty mind.\
\
\'93That life is heaven,\'94 he said to me suddenly, \'93that I have long been\
thinking about\'94; and all at once he added, \'93I think of nothing else\
indeed.\'94 He looked at me and smiled. \'93I am more convinced of it than you\
are, I will tell you later why.\'94\
\
I listened to him and thought that he evidently wanted to tell me\
something.\
\
\'93Heaven,\'94 he went on, \'93lies hidden within all of us\'97here it lies hidden in\
me now, and if I will it, it will be revealed to me to\uc0\u8208 morrow and for all\
time.\'94\
\
I looked at him; he was speaking with great emotion and gazing\
mysteriously at me, as if he were questioning me.\
\
\'93And that we are all responsible to all for all, apart from our own sins,\
you were quite right in thinking that, and it is wonderful how you could\
comprehend it in all its significance at once. And in very truth, so soon\
as men understand that, the Kingdom of Heaven will be for them not a\
dream, but a living reality.\'94\
\
\'93And when,\'94 I cried out to him bitterly, \'93when will that come to pass? and\
will it ever come to pass? Is not it simply a dream of ours?\'94\
\
\'93What then, you don\'92t believe it,\'94 he said. \'93You preach it and don\'92t\
believe it yourself. Believe me, this dream, as you call it, will come to\
pass without doubt; it will come, but not now, for every process has its\
law. It\'92s a spiritual, psychological process. To transform the world, to\
recreate it afresh, men must turn into another path psychologically. Until\
you have become really, in actual fact, a brother to every one,\
brotherhood will not come to pass. No sort of scientific teaching, no kind\
of common interest, will ever teach men to share property and privileges\
with equal consideration for all. Every one will think his share too small\
and they will be always envying, complaining and attacking one another.\
You ask when it will come to pass; it will come to pass, but first we have\
to go through the period of isolation.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean by isolation?\'94 I asked him.\
\
\'93Why, the isolation that prevails everywhere, above all in our age\'97it has\
not fully developed, it has not reached its limit yet. For every one\
strives to keep his individuality as apart as possible, wishes to secure\
the greatest possible fullness of life for himself; but meantime all his\
efforts result not in attaining fullness of life but self\uc0\u8208 destruction, for\
instead of self\uc0\u8208 realization he ends by arriving at complete solitude. All\
mankind in our age have split up into units, they all keep apart, each in\
his own groove; each one holds aloof, hides himself and hides what he has,\
from the rest, and he ends by being repelled by others and repelling them.\
He heaps up riches by himself and thinks, \'91How strong I am now and how\
secure,\'92 and in his madness he does not understand that the more he heaps\
up, the more he sinks into self\uc0\u8208 destructive impotence. For he is\
accustomed to rely upon himself alone and to cut himself off from the\
whole; he has trained himself not to believe in the help of others, in men\
and in humanity, and only trembles for fear he should lose his money and\
the privileges that he has won for himself. Everywhere in these days men\
have, in their mockery, ceased to understand that the true security is to\
be found in social solidarity rather than in isolated individual effort.\
But this terrible individualism must inevitably have an end, and all will\
suddenly understand how unnaturally they are separated from one another.\
It will be the spirit of the time, and people will marvel that they have\
sat so long in darkness without seeing the light. And then the sign of the\
Son of Man will be seen in the heavens.... But, until then, we must keep\
the banner flying. Sometimes even if he has to do it alone, and his\
conduct seems to be crazy, a man must set an example, and so draw men\'92s\
souls out of their solitude, and spur them to some act of brotherly love,\
that the great idea may not die.\'94\
\
Our evenings, one after another, were spent in such stirring and fervent\
talk. I gave up society and visited my neighbors much less frequently.\
Besides, my vogue was somewhat over. I say this, not as blame, for they\
still loved me and treated me good\uc0\u8208 humoredly, but there\'92s no denying that\
fashion is a great power in society. I began to regard my mysterious\
visitor with admiration, for besides enjoying his intelligence, I began to\
perceive that he was brooding over some plan in his heart, and was\
preparing himself perhaps for a great deed. Perhaps he liked my not\
showing curiosity about his secret, not seeking to discover it by direct\
question nor by insinuation. But I noticed at last, that he seemed to show\
signs of wanting to tell me something. This had become quite evident,\
indeed, about a month after he first began to visit me.\
\
\'93Do you know,\'94 he said to me once, \'93that people are very inquisitive about\
us in the town and wonder why I come to see you so often. But let them\
wonder, for _soon all will be explained_.\'94\
\
Sometimes an extraordinary agitation would come over him, and almost\
always on such occasions he would get up and go away. Sometimes he would\
fix a long piercing look upon me, and I thought, \'93He will say something\
directly now.\'94 But he would suddenly begin talking of something ordinary\
and familiar. He often complained of headache too.\
\
One day, quite unexpectedly indeed, after he had been talking with great\
fervor a long time, I saw him suddenly turn pale, and his face worked\
convulsively, while he stared persistently at me.\
\
\'93What\'92s the matter?\'94 I said; \'93do you feel ill?\'94\'97he had just been\
complaining of headache.\
\
\'93I ... do you know ... I murdered some one.\'94\
\
He said this and smiled with a face as white as chalk. \'93Why is it he is\
smiling?\'94 The thought flashed through my mind before I realized anything\
else. I too turned pale.\
\
\'93What are you saying?\'94 I cried.\
\
\'93You see,\'94 he said, with a pale smile, \'93how much it has cost me to say the\
first word. Now I have said it, I feel I\'92ve taken the first step and shall\
go on.\'94\
\
For a long while I could not believe him, and I did not believe him at\
that time, but only after he had been to see me three days running and\
told me all about it. I thought he was mad, but ended by being convinced,\
to my great grief and amazement. His crime was a great and terrible one.\
\
Fourteen years before, he had murdered the widow of a landowner, a wealthy\
and handsome young woman who had a house in our town. He fell passionately\
in love with her, declared his feeling and tried to persuade her to marry\
him. But she had already given her heart to another man, an officer of\
noble birth and high rank in the service, who was at that time away at the\
front, though she was expecting him soon to return. She refused his offer\
and begged him not to come and see her. After he had ceased to visit her,\
he took advantage of his knowledge of the house to enter at night through\
the garden by the roof, at great risk of discovery. But, as often happens,\
a crime committed with extraordinary audacity is more successful than\
others.\
\
Entering the garret through the skylight, he went down the ladder, knowing\
that the door at the bottom of it was sometimes, through the negligence of\
the servants, left unlocked. He hoped to find it so, and so it was. He\
made his way in the dark to her bedroom, where a light was burning. As\
though on purpose, both her maids had gone off to a birthday\uc0\u8208 party in the\
same street, without asking leave. The other servants slept in the\
servants\'92 quarters or in the kitchen on the ground\uc0\u8208 floor. His passion\
flamed up at the sight of her asleep, and then vindictive, jealous anger\
took possession of his heart, and like a drunken man, beside himself, he\
thrust a knife into her heart, so that she did not even cry out. Then with\
devilish and criminal cunning he contrived that suspicion should fall on\
the servants. He was so base as to take her purse, to open her chest with\
keys from under her pillow, and to take some things from it, doing it all\
as it might have been done by an ignorant servant, leaving valuable papers\
and taking only money. He took some of the larger gold things, but left\
smaller articles that were ten times as valuable. He took with him, too,\
some things for himself as remembrances, but of that later. Having done\
this awful deed, he returned by the way he had come.\
\
Neither the next day, when the alarm was raised, nor at any time after in\
his life, did any one dream of suspecting that he was the criminal. No one\
indeed knew of his love for her, for he was always reserved and silent and\
had no friend to whom he would have opened his heart. He was looked upon\
simply as an acquaintance, and not a very intimate one, of the murdered\
woman, as for the previous fortnight he had not even visited her. A serf\
of hers called Pyotr was at once suspected, and every circumstance\
confirmed the suspicion. The man knew\'97indeed his mistress did not conceal\
the fact\'97that having to send one of her serfs as a recruit she had decided\
to send him, as he had no relations and his conduct was unsatisfactory.\
People had heard him angrily threatening to murder her when he was drunk\
in a tavern. Two days before her death, he had run away, staying no one\
knew where in the town. The day after the murder, he was found on the road\
leading out of the town, dead drunk, with a knife in his pocket, and his\
right hand happened to be stained with blood. He declared that his nose\
had been bleeding, but no one believed him. The maids confessed that they\
had gone to a party and that the street\uc0\u8208 door had been left open till they\
returned. And a number of similar details came to light, throwing\
suspicion on the innocent servant.\
\
They arrested him, and he was tried for the murder; but a week after the\
arrest, the prisoner fell sick of a fever and died unconscious in the\
hospital. There the matter ended and the judges and the authorities and\
every one in the town remained convinced that the crime had been committed\
by no one but the servant who had died in the hospital. And after that the\
punishment began.\
\
My mysterious visitor, now my friend, told me that at first he was not in\
the least troubled by pangs of conscience. He was miserable a long time,\
but not for that reason; only from regret that he had killed the woman he\
loved, that she was no more, that in killing her he had killed his love,\
while the fire of passion was still in his veins. But of the innocent\
blood he had shed, of the murder of a fellow creature, he scarcely\
thought. The thought that his victim might have become the wife of another\
man was insupportable to him, and so, for a long time, he was convinced in\
his conscience that he could not have acted otherwise.\
\
At first he was worried at the arrest of the servant, but his illness and\
death soon set his mind at rest, for the man\'92s death was apparently (so he\
reflected at the time) not owing to his arrest or his fright, but a chill\
he had taken on the day he ran away, when he had lain all night dead drunk\
on the damp ground. The theft of the money and other things troubled him\
little, for he argued that the theft had not been committed for gain but\
to avert suspicion. The sum stolen was small, and he shortly afterwards\
subscribed the whole of it, and much more, towards the funds for\
maintaining an almshouse in the town. He did this on purpose to set his\
conscience at rest about the theft, and it\'92s a remarkable fact that for a\
long time he really was at peace\'97he told me this himself. He entered then\
upon a career of great activity in the service, volunteered for a\
difficult and laborious duty, which occupied him two years, and being a\
man of strong will almost forgot the past. Whenever he recalled it, he\
tried not to think of it at all. He became active in philanthropy too,\
founded and helped to maintain many institutions in the town, did a good\
deal in the two capitals, and in both Moscow and Petersburg was elected a\
member of philanthropic societies.\
\
At last, however, he began brooding over the past, and the strain of it\
was too much for him. Then he was attracted by a fine and intelligent girl\
and soon after married her, hoping that marriage would dispel his lonely\
depression, and that by entering on a new life and scrupulously doing his\
duty to his wife and children, he would escape from old memories\
altogether. But the very opposite of what he expected happened. He began,\
even in the first month of his marriage, to be continually fretted by the\
thought, \'93My wife loves me\'97but what if she knew?\'94 When she first told him\
that she would soon bear him a child, he was troubled. \'93I am giving life,\
but I have taken life.\'94 Children came. \'93How dare I love them, teach and\
educate them, how can I talk to them of virtue? I have shed blood.\'94 They\
were splendid children, he longed to caress them; \'93and I can\'92t look at\
their innocent candid faces, I am unworthy.\'94\
\
At last he began to be bitterly and ominously haunted by the blood of his\
murdered victim, by the young life he had destroyed, by the blood that\
cried out for vengeance. He had begun to have awful dreams. But, being a\
man of fortitude, he bore his suffering a long time, thinking: \'93I shall\
expiate everything by this secret agony.\'94 But that hope, too, was vain;\
the longer it went on, the more intense was his suffering.\
\
He was respected in society for his active benevolence, though every one\
was overawed by his stern and gloomy character. But the more he was\
respected, the more intolerable it was for him. He confessed to me that he\
had thoughts of killing himself. But he began to be haunted by another\
idea\'97an idea which he had at first regarded as impossible and unthinkable,\
though at last it got such a hold on his heart that he could not shake it\
off. He dreamed of rising up, going out and confessing in the face of all\
men that he had committed murder. For three years this dream had pursued\
him, haunting him in different forms. At last he believed with his whole\
heart that if he confessed his crime, he would heal his soul and would be\
at peace for ever. But this belief filled his heart with terror, for how\
could he carry it out? And then came what happened at my duel.\
\
\'93Looking at you, I have made up my mind.\'94\
\
I looked at him.\
\
\'93Is it possible,\'94 I cried, clasping my hands, \'93that such a trivial\
incident could give rise to such a resolution in you?\'94\
\
\'93My resolution has been growing for the last three years,\'94 he answered,\
\'93and your story only gave the last touch to it. Looking at you, I\
reproached myself and envied you.\'94 He said this to me almost sullenly.\
\
\'93But you won\'92t be believed,\'94 I observed; \'93it\'92s fourteen years ago.\'94\
\
\'93I have proofs, great proofs. I shall show them.\'94\
\
Then I cried and kissed him.\
\
\'93Tell me one thing, one thing,\'94 he said (as though it all depended upon\
me), \'93my wife, my children! My wife may die of grief, and though my\
children won\'92t lose their rank and property, they\'92ll be a convict\'92s\
children and for ever! And what a memory, what a memory of me I shall\
leave in their hearts!\'94\
\
I said nothing.\
\
\'93And to part from them, to leave them for ever? It\'92s for ever, you know,\
for ever!\'94\
\
I sat still and repeated a silent prayer. I got up at last, I felt afraid.\
\
\'93Well?\'94 He looked at me.\
\
\'93Go!\'94 said I, \'93confess. Everything passes, only the truth remains. Your\
children will understand, when they grow up, the nobility of your\
resolution.\'94\
\
He left me that time as though he had made up his mind. Yet for more than\
a fortnight afterwards, he came to me every evening, still preparing\
himself, still unable to bring himself to the point. He made my heart\
ache. One day he would come determined and say fervently:\
\
\'93I know it will be heaven for me, heaven, the moment I confess. Fourteen\
years I\'92ve been in hell. I want to suffer. I will take my punishment and\
begin to live. You can pass through the world doing wrong, but there\'92s no\
turning back. Now I dare not love my neighbor nor even my own children.\
Good God, my children will understand, perhaps, what my punishment has\
cost me and will not condemn me! God is not in strength but in truth.\'94\
\
\'93All will understand your sacrifice,\'94 I said to him, \'93if not at once, they\
will understand later; for you have served truth, the higher truth, not of\
the earth.\'94\
\
And he would go away seeming comforted, but next day he would come again,\
bitter, pale, sarcastic.\
\
\'93Every time I come to you, you look at me so inquisitively as though to\
say, \'91He has still not confessed!\'92 Wait a bit, don\'92t despise me too much.\
It\'92s not such an easy thing to do, as you would think. Perhaps I shall not\
do it at all. You won\'92t go and inform against me then, will you?\'94\
\
And far from looking at him with indiscreet curiosity, I was afraid to\
look at him at all. I was quite ill from anxiety, and my heart was full of\
tears. I could not sleep at night.\
\
\'93I have just come from my wife,\'94 he went on. \'93Do you understand what the\
word \'91wife\'92 means? When I went out, the children called to me, \'91Good\uc0\u8208 by,\
father, make haste back to read _The Children\'92s Magazine_ with us.\'92 No,\
you don\'92t understand that! No one is wise from another man\'92s woe.\'94\
\
His eyes were glittering, his lips were twitching. Suddenly he struck the\
table with his fist so that everything on it danced\'97it was the first time\
he had done such a thing, he was such a mild man.\
\
\'93But need I?\'94 he exclaimed, \'93must I? No one has been condemned, no one has\
been sent to Siberia in my place, the man died of fever. And I\'92ve been\
punished by my sufferings for the blood I shed. And I shan\'92t be believed,\
they won\'92t believe my proofs. Need I confess, need I? I am ready to go on\
suffering all my life for the blood I have shed, if only my wife and\
children may be spared. Will it be just to ruin them with me? Aren\'92t we\
making a mistake? What is right in this case? And will people recognize\
it, will they appreciate it, will they respect it?\'94\
\
\'93Good Lord!\'94 I thought to myself, \'93he is thinking of other people\'92s\
respect at such a moment!\'94 And I felt so sorry for him then, that I\
believe I would have shared his fate if it could have comforted him. I saw\
he was beside himself. I was aghast, realizing with my heart as well as my\
mind what such a resolution meant.\
\
\'93Decide my fate!\'94 he exclaimed again.\
\
\'93Go and confess,\'94 I whispered to him. My voice failed me, but I whispered\
it firmly. I took up the New Testament from the table, the Russian\
translation, and showed him the Gospel of St. John, chapter xii. verse 24:\
\
\'93Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a corn of wheat fall into the\
ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much\
fruit.\'94\
\
I had just been reading that verse when he came in. He read it.\
\
\'93That\'92s true,\'94 he said, but he smiled bitterly. \'93It\'92s terrible the things\
you find in those books,\'94 he said, after a pause. \'93It\'92s easy enough to\
thrust them upon one. And who wrote them? Can they have been written by\
men?\'94\
\
\'93The Holy Spirit wrote them,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93It\'92s easy for you to prate,\'94 he smiled again, this time almost with\
hatred.\
\
I took the book again, opened it in another place and showed him the\
Epistle to the Hebrews, chapter x. verse 31. He read:\
\
\'93It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.\'94\
\
He read it and simply flung down the book. He was trembling all over.\
\
\'93An awful text,\'94 he said. \'93There\'92s no denying you\'92ve picked out fitting\
ones.\'94 He rose from the chair. \'93Well!\'94 he said, \'93good\uc0\u8208 by, perhaps I shan\'92t\
come again ... we shall meet in heaven. So I have been for fourteen years\
\'91in the hands of the living God,\'92 that\'92s how one must think of those\
fourteen years. To\uc0\u8208 morrow I will beseech those hands to let me go.\'94\
\
I wanted to take him in my arms and kiss him, but I did not dare\'97his face\
was contorted and somber. He went away.\
\
\'93Good God,\'94 I thought, \'93what has he gone to face!\'94 I fell on my knees\
before the ikon and wept for him before the Holy Mother of God, our swift\
defender and helper. I was half an hour praying in tears, and it was late,\
about midnight. Suddenly I saw the door open and he came in again. I was\
surprised.\
\
\'93Where have you been?\'94 I asked him.\
\
\'93I think,\'94 he said, \'93I\'92ve forgotten something ... my handkerchief, I\
think.... Well, even if I\'92ve not forgotten anything, let me stay a\
little.\'94\
\
He sat down. I stood over him.\
\
\'93You sit down, too,\'94 said he.\
\
I sat down. We sat still for two minutes; he looked intently at me and\
suddenly smiled\'97I remembered that\'97then he got up, embraced me warmly and\
kissed me.\
\
\'93Remember,\'94 he said, \'93how I came to you a second time. Do you hear,\
remember it!\'94\
\
And he went out.\
\
\'93To\uc0\u8208 morrow,\'94 I thought.\
\
And so it was. I did not know that evening that the next day was his\
birthday. I had not been out for the last few days, so I had no chance of\
hearing it from any one. On that day he always had a great gathering,\
every one in the town went to it. It was the same this time. After dinner\
he walked into the middle of the room, with a paper in his hand\'97a formal\
declaration to the chief of his department who was present. This\
declaration he read aloud to the whole assembly. It contained a full\
account of the crime, in every detail.\
\
\'93I cut myself off from men as a monster. God has visited me,\'94 he said in\
conclusion. \'93I want to suffer for my sin!\'94\
\
Then he brought out and laid on the table all the things he had been\
keeping for fourteen years, that he thought would prove his crime, the\
jewels belonging to the murdered woman which he had stolen to divert\
suspicion, a cross and a locket taken from her neck with a portrait of her\
betrothed in the locket, her notebook and two letters; one from her\
betrothed, telling her that he would soon be with her, and her unfinished\
answer left on the table to be sent off next day. He carried off these two\
letters\'97what for? Why had he kept them for fourteen years afterwards\
instead of destroying them as evidence against him?\
\
And this is what happened: every one was amazed and horrified, every one\
refused to believe it and thought that he was deranged, though all\
listened with intense curiosity. A few days later it was fully decided and\
agreed in every house that the unhappy man was mad. The legal authorities\
could not refuse to take the case up, but they too dropped it. Though the\
trinkets and letters made them ponder, they decided that even if they did\
turn out to be authentic, no charge could be based on those alone.\
Besides, she might have given him those things as a friend, or asked him\
to take care of them for her. I heard afterwards, however, that the\
genuineness of the things was proved by the friends and relations of the\
murdered woman, and that there was no doubt about them. Yet nothing was\
destined to come of it, after all.\
\
Five days later, all had heard that he was ill and that his life was in\
danger. The nature of his illness I can\'92t explain, they said it was an\
affection of the heart. But it became known that the doctors had been\
induced by his wife to investigate his mental condition also, and had come\
to the conclusion that it was a case of insanity. I betrayed nothing,\
though people ran to question me. But when I wanted to visit him, I was\
for a long while forbidden to do so, above all by his wife.\
\
\'93It\'92s you who have caused his illness,\'94 she said to me; \'93he was always\
gloomy, but for the last year people noticed that he was peculiarly\
excited and did strange things, and now you have been the ruin of him.\
Your preaching has brought him to this; for the last month he was always\
with you.\'94\
\
Indeed, not only his wife but the whole town were down upon me and blamed\
me. \'93It\'92s all your doing,\'94 they said. I was silent and indeed rejoiced at\
heart, for I saw plainly God\'92s mercy to the man who had turned against\
himself and punished himself. I could not believe in his insanity.\
\
They let me see him at last, he insisted upon saying good\uc0\u8208 by to me. I went\
in to him and saw at once, that not only his days, but his hours were\
numbered. He was weak, yellow, his hands trembled, he gasped for breath,\
but his face was full of tender and happy feeling.\
\
\'93It is done!\'94 he said. \'93I\'92ve long been yearning to see you, why didn\'92t you\
come?\'94\
\
I did not tell him that they would not let me see him.\
\
\'93God has had pity on me and is calling me to Himself. I know I am dying,\
but I feel joy and peace for the first time after so many years. There was\
heaven in my heart from the moment I had done what I had to do. Now I dare\
to love my children and to kiss them. Neither my wife nor the judges, nor\
any one has believed it. My children will never believe it either. I see\
in that God\'92s mercy to them. I shall die, and my name will be without a\
stain for them. And now I feel God near, my heart rejoices as in Heaven\
... I have done my duty.\'94\
\
He could not speak, he gasped for breath, he pressed my hand warmly,\
looking fervently at me. We did not talk for long, his wife kept peeping\
in at us. But he had time to whisper to me:\
\
\'93Do you remember how I came back to you that second time, at midnight? I\
told you to remember it. You know what I came back for? I came to kill\
you!\'94\
\
I started.\
\
\'93I went out from you then into the darkness, I wandered about the streets,\
struggling with myself. And suddenly I hated you so that I could hardly\
bear it. Now, I thought, he is all that binds me, and he is my judge. I\
can\'92t refuse to face my punishment to\uc0\u8208 morrow, for he knows all. It was not\
that I was afraid you would betray me (I never even thought of that), but\
I thought, \'91How can I look him in the face if I don\'92t confess?\'92 And if you\
had been at the other end of the earth, but alive, it would have been all\
the same, the thought was unendurable that you were alive knowing\
everything and condemning me. I hated you as though you were the cause, as\
though you were to blame for everything. I came back to you then,\
remembering that you had a dagger lying on your table. I sat down and\
asked you to sit down, and for a whole minute I pondered. If I had killed\
you, I should have been ruined by that murder even if I had not confessed\
the other. But I didn\'92t think about that at all, and I didn\'92t want to\
think of it at that moment. I only hated you and longed to revenge myself\
on you for everything. The Lord vanquished the devil in my heart. But let\
me tell you, you were never nearer death.\'94\
\
A week later he died. The whole town followed him to the grave. The chief\
priest made a speech full of feeling. All lamented the terrible illness\
that had cut short his days. But all the town was up in arms against me\
after the funeral, and people even refused to see me. Some, at first a few\
and afterwards more, began indeed to believe in the truth of his story,\
and they visited me and questioned me with great interest and eagerness,\
for man loves to see the downfall and disgrace of the righteous. But I\
held my tongue, and very shortly after, I left the town, and five months\
later by God\'92s grace I entered upon the safe and blessed path, praising\
the unseen finger which had guided me so clearly to it. But I remember in\
my prayer to this day, the servant of God, Mihail, who suffered so\
greatly.\
\
\
\
Chapter III. Conversations And Exhortations Of Father Zossima\
\
\
_(e) The Russian Monk and his possible Significance_\
\
Fathers and teachers, what is the monk? In the cultivated world the word\
is nowadays pronounced by some people with a jeer, and by others it is\
used as a term of abuse, and this contempt for the monk is growing. It is\
true, alas, it is true, that there are many sluggards, gluttons,\
profligates and insolent beggars among monks. Educated people point to\
these: \'93You are idlers, useless members of society, you live on the labor\
of others, you are shameless beggars.\'94 And yet how many meek and humble\
monks there are, yearning for solitude and fervent prayer in peace! These\
are less noticed, or passed over in silence. And how surprised men would\
be if I were to say that from these meek monks, who yearn for solitary\
prayer, the salvation of Russia will come perhaps once more! For they are\
in truth made ready in peace and quiet \'93for the day and the hour, the\
month and the year.\'94 Meanwhile, in their solitude, they keep the image of\
Christ fair and undefiled, in the purity of God\'92s truth, from the times of\
the Fathers of old, the Apostles and the martyrs. And when the time comes\
they will show it to the tottering creeds of the world. That is a great\
thought. That star will rise out of the East.\
\
That is my view of the monk, and is it false? is it too proud? Look at the\
worldly and all who set themselves up above the people of God, has not\
God\'92s image and His truth been distorted in them? They have science; but\
in science there is nothing but what is the object of sense. The spiritual\
world, the higher part of man\'92s being is rejected altogether, dismissed\
with a sort of triumph, even with hatred. The world has proclaimed the\
reign of freedom, especially of late, but what do we see in this freedom\
of theirs? Nothing but slavery and self\uc0\u8208 destruction! For the world says:\
\
\'93You have desires and so satisfy them, for you have the same rights as the\
most rich and powerful. Don\'92t be afraid of satisfying them and even\
multiply your desires.\'94 That is the modern doctrine of the world. In that\
they see freedom. And what follows from this right of multiplication of\
desires? In the rich, isolation and spiritual suicide; in the poor, envy\
and murder; for they have been given rights, but have not been shown the\
means of satisfying their wants. They maintain that the world is getting\
more and more united, more and more bound together in brotherly community,\
as it overcomes distance and sets thoughts flying through the air.\
\
Alas, put no faith in such a bond of union. Interpreting freedom as the\
multiplication and rapid satisfaction of desires, men distort their own\
nature, for many senseless and foolish desires and habits and ridiculous\
fancies are fostered in them. They live only for mutual envy, for luxury\
and ostentation. To have dinners, visits, carriages, rank and slaves to\
wait on one is looked upon as a necessity, for which life, honor and human\
feeling are sacrificed, and men even commit suicide if they are unable to\
satisfy it. We see the same thing among those who are not rich, while the\
poor drown their unsatisfied need and their envy in drunkenness. But soon\
they will drink blood instead of wine, they are being led on to it. I ask\
you is such a man free? I knew one \'93champion of freedom\'94 who told me\
himself that, when he was deprived of tobacco in prison, he was so\
wretched at the privation that he almost went and betrayed his cause for\
the sake of getting tobacco again! And such a man says, \'93I am fighting for\
the cause of humanity.\'94\
\
How can such a one fight? what is he fit for? He is capable perhaps of\
some action quickly over, but he cannot hold out long. And it\'92s no wonder\
that instead of gaining freedom they have sunk into slavery, and instead\
of serving the cause of brotherly love and the union of humanity have\
fallen, on the contrary, into dissension and isolation, as my mysterious\
visitor and teacher said to me in my youth. And therefore the idea of the\
service of humanity, of brotherly love and the solidarity of mankind, is\
more and more dying out in the world, and indeed this idea is sometimes\
treated with derision. For how can a man shake off his habits? What can\
become of him if he is in such bondage to the habit of satisfying the\
innumerable desires he has created for himself? He is isolated, and what\
concern has he with the rest of humanity? They have succeeded in\
accumulating a greater mass of objects, but the joy in the world has grown\
less.\
\
The monastic way is very different. Obedience, fasting and prayer are\
laughed at, yet only through them lies the way to real, true freedom. I\
cut off my superfluous and unnecessary desires, I subdue my proud and\
wanton will and chastise it with obedience, and with God\'92s help I attain\
freedom of spirit and with it spiritual joy. Which is most capable of\
conceiving a great idea and serving it\'97the rich man in his isolation or\
the man who has freed himself from the tyranny of material things and\
habits? The monk is reproached for his solitude, \'93You have secluded\
yourself within the walls of the monastery for your own salvation, and\
have forgotten the brotherly service of humanity!\'94 But we shall see which\
will be most zealous in the cause of brotherly love. For it is not we, but\
they, who are in isolation, though they don\'92t see that. Of old, leaders of\
the people came from among us, and why should they not again? The same\
meek and humble ascetics will rise up and go out to work for the great\
cause. The salvation of Russia comes from the people. And the Russian monk\
has always been on the side of the people. We are isolated only if the\
people are isolated. The people believe as we do, and an unbelieving\
reformer will never do anything in Russia, even if he is sincere in heart\
and a genius. Remember that! The people will meet the atheist and overcome\
him, and Russia will be one and orthodox. Take care of the peasant and\
guard his heart. Go on educating him quietly. That\'92s your duty as monks,\
for the peasant has God in his heart.\
\
(_f_) _Of Masters and Servants, and of whether it is possible for them to\
be Brothers in the Spirit_\
\
Of course, I don\'92t deny that there is sin in the peasants too. And the\
fire of corruption is spreading visibly, hourly, working from above\
downwards. The spirit of isolation is coming upon the people too. Money\uc0\u8208 \
lenders and devourers of the commune are rising up. Already the merchant\
grows more and more eager for rank, and strives to show himself cultured\
though he has not a trace of culture, and to this end meanly despises his\
old traditions, and is even ashamed of the faith of his fathers. He visits\
princes, though he is only a peasant corrupted. The peasants are rotting\
in drunkenness and cannot shake off the habit. And what cruelty to their\
wives, to their children even! All from drunkenness! I\'92ve seen in the\
factories children of nine years old, frail, rickety, bent and already\
depraved. The stuffy workshop, the din of machinery, work all day long,\
the vile language and the drink, the drink\'97is that what a little child\'92s\
heart needs? He needs sunshine, childish play, good examples all about\
him, and at least a little love. There must be no more of this, monks, no\
more torturing of children, rise up and preach that, make haste, make\
haste!\
\
But God will save Russia, for though the peasants are corrupted and cannot\
renounce their filthy sin, yet they know it is cursed by God and that they\
do wrong in sinning. So that our people still believe in righteousness,\
have faith in God and weep tears of devotion.\
\
It is different with the upper classes. They, following science, want to\
base justice on reason alone, but not with Christ, as before, and they\
have already proclaimed that there is no crime, that there is no sin. And\
that\'92s consistent, for if you have no God what is the meaning of crime? In\
Europe the people are already rising up against the rich with violence,\
and the leaders of the people are everywhere leading them to bloodshed,\
and teaching them that their wrath is righteous. But their \'93wrath is\
accursed, for it is cruel.\'94 But God will save Russia as He has saved her\
many times. Salvation will come from the people, from their faith and\
their meekness.\
\
Fathers and teachers, watch over the people\'92s faith and this will not be a\
dream. I\'92ve been struck all my life in our great people by their dignity,\
their true and seemly dignity. I\'92ve seen it myself, I can testify to it,\
I\'92ve seen it and marveled at it, I\'92ve seen it in spite of the degraded\
sins and poverty\uc0\u8208 stricken appearance of our peasantry. They are not\
servile, and even after two centuries of serfdom they are free in manner\
and bearing, yet without insolence, and not revengeful and not envious.\
\'93You are rich and noble, you are clever and talented, well, be so, God\
bless you. I respect you, but I know that I too am a man. By the very fact\
that I respect you without envy I prove my dignity as a man.\'94\
\
In truth if they don\'92t say this (for they don\'92t know how to say this yet),\
that is how they act. I have seen it myself, I have known it myself, and,\
would you believe it, the poorer our Russian peasant is, the more\
noticeable is that serene goodness, for the rich among them are for the\
most part corrupted already, and much of that is due to our carelessness\
and indifference. But God will save His people, for Russia is great in her\
humility. I dream of seeing, and seem to see clearly already, our future.\
It will come to pass, that even the most corrupt of our rich will end by\
being ashamed of his riches before the poor, and the poor, seeing his\
humility, will understand and give way before him, will respond joyfully\
and kindly to his honorable shame. Believe me that it will end in that;\
things are moving to that. Equality is to be found only in the spiritual\
dignity of man, and that will only be understood among us. If we were\
brothers, there would be fraternity, but before that, they will never\
agree about the division of wealth. We preserve the image of Christ, and\
it will shine forth like a precious diamond to the whole world. So may it\
be, so may it be!\
\
Fathers and teachers, a touching incident befell me once. In my wanderings\
I met in the town of K. my old orderly, Afanasy. It was eight years since\
I had parted from him. He chanced to see me in the market\uc0\u8208 place,\
recognized me, ran up to me, and how delighted he was! He simply pounced\
on me: \'93Master dear, is it you? Is it really you I see?\'94 He took me home\
with him.\
\
He was no longer in the army, he was married and already had two little\
children. He and his wife earned their living as costermongers in the\
market\uc0\u8208 place. His room was poor, but bright and clean. He made me sit\
down, set the samovar, sent for his wife, as though my appearance were a\
festival for them. He brought me his children: \'93Bless them, Father.\'94\
\
\'93Is it for me to bless them? I am only a humble monk. I will pray for\
them. And for you, Afanasy Pavlovitch, I have prayed every day since that\
day, for it all came from you,\'94 said I. And I explained that to him as\
well as I could. And what do you think? The man kept gazing at me and\
could not believe that I, his former master, an officer, was now before\
him in such a guise and position; it made him shed tears.\
\
\'93Why are you weeping?\'94 said I, \'93better rejoice over me, dear friend, whom\
I can never forget, for my path is a glad and joyful one.\'94\
\
He did not say much, but kept sighing and shaking his head over me\
tenderly.\
\
\'93What has became of your fortune?\'94 he asked.\
\
\'93I gave it to the monastery,\'94 I answered; \'93we live in common.\'94\
\
After tea I began saying good\uc0\u8208 by, and suddenly he brought out half a\
rouble as an offering to the monastery, and another half\uc0\u8208 rouble I saw him\
thrusting hurriedly into my hand: \'93That\'92s for you in your wanderings, it\
may be of use to you, Father.\'94\
\
I took his half\uc0\u8208 rouble, bowed to him and his wife, and went out rejoicing.\
And on my way I thought: \'93Here we are both now, he at home and I on the\
road, sighing and shaking our heads, no doubt, and yet smiling joyfully in\
the gladness of our hearts, remembering how God brought about our\
meeting.\'94\
\
I have never seen him again since then. I had been his master and he my\
servant, but now when we exchanged a loving kiss with softened hearts,\
there was a great human bond between us. I have thought a great deal about\
that, and now what I think is this: Is it so inconceivable that that grand\
and simple\uc0\u8208 hearted unity might in due time become universal among the\
Russian people? I believe that it will come to pass and that the time is\
at hand.\
\
And of servants I will add this: In old days when I was young I was often\
angry with servants; \'93the cook had served something too hot, the orderly\
had not brushed my clothes.\'94 But what taught me better then was a thought\
of my dear brother\'92s, which I had heard from him in childhood: \'93Am I worth\
it, that another should serve me and be ordered about by me in his poverty\
and ignorance?\'94 And I wondered at the time that such simple and self\uc0\u8208 \
evident ideas should be so slow to occur to our minds.\
\
It is impossible that there should be no servants in the world, but act so\
that your servant may be freer in spirit than if he were not a servant.\
And why cannot I be a servant to my servant and even let him see it, and\
that without any pride on my part or any mistrust on his? Why should not\
my servant be like my own kindred, so that I may take him into my family\
and rejoice in doing so? Even now this can be done, but it will lead to\
the grand unity of men in the future, when a man will not seek servants\
for himself, or desire to turn his fellow creatures into servants as he\
does now, but on the contrary, will long with his whole heart to be the\
servant of all, as the Gospel teaches.\
\
And can it be a dream, that in the end man will find his joy only in deeds\
of light and mercy, and not in cruel pleasures as now, in gluttony,\
fornication, ostentation, boasting and envious rivalry of one with the\
other? I firmly believe that it is not and that the time is at hand.\
People laugh and ask: \'93When will that time come and does it look like\
coming?\'94 I believe that with Christ\'92s help we shall accomplish this great\
thing. And how many ideas there have been on earth in the history of man\
which were unthinkable ten years before they appeared! Yet when their\
destined hour had come, they came forth and spread over the whole earth.\
So it will be with us, and our people will shine forth in the world, and\
all men will say: \'93The stone which the builders rejected has become the\
corner\uc0\u8208 stone of the building.\'94\
\
And we may ask the scornful themselves: If our hope is a dream, when will\
you build up your edifice and order things justly by your intellect alone,\
without Christ? If they declare that it is they who are advancing towards\
unity, only the most simple\uc0\u8208 hearted among them believe it, so that one may\
positively marvel at such simplicity. Of a truth, they have more fantastic\
dreams than we. They aim at justice, but, denying Christ, they will end by\
flooding the earth with blood, for blood cries out for blood, and he that\
taketh up the sword shall perish by the sword. And if it were not for\
Christ\'92s covenant, they would slaughter one another down to the last two\
men on earth. And those two last men would not be able to restrain each\
other in their pride, and the one would slay the other and then himself.\
And that would come to pass, were it not for the promise of Christ that\
for the sake of the humble and meek the days shall be shortened.\
\
While I was still wearing an officer\'92s uniform after my duel, I talked\
about servants in general society, and I remember every one was amazed at\
me. \'93What!\'94 they asked, \'93are we to make our servants sit down on the sofa\
and offer them tea?\'94 And I answered them: \'93Why not, sometimes at least?\'94\
Every one laughed. Their question was frivolous and my answer was not\
clear; but the thought in it was to some extent right.\
\
(_g_) _Of Prayer, of Love, and of Contact with other Worlds_\
\
Young man, be not forgetful of prayer. Every time you pray, if your prayer\
is sincere, there will be new feeling and new meaning in it, which will\
give you fresh courage, and you will understand that prayer is an\
education. Remember, too, every day, and whenever you can, repeat to\
yourself, \'93Lord, have mercy on all who appear before Thee to\uc0\u8208 day.\'94 For\
every hour and every moment thousands of men leave life on this earth, and\
their souls appear before God. And how many of them depart in solitude,\
unknown, sad, dejected that no one mourns for them or even knows whether\
they have lived or not! And behold, from the other end of the earth\
perhaps, your prayer for their rest will rise up to God though you knew\
them not nor they you. How touching it must be to a soul standing in dread\
before the Lord to feel at that instant that, for him too, there is one to\
pray, that there is a fellow creature left on earth to love him too! And\
God will look on you both more graciously, for if you have had so much\
pity on him, how much will He have pity Who is infinitely more loving and\
merciful than you! And He will forgive him for your sake.\
\
Brothers, have no fear of men\'92s sin. Love a man even in his sin, for that\
is the semblance of Divine Love and is the highest love on earth. Love all\
God\'92s creation, the whole and every grain of sand in it. Love every leaf,\
every ray of God\'92s light. Love the animals, love the plants, love\
everything. If you love everything, you will perceive the divine mystery\
in things. Once you perceive it, you will begin to comprehend it better\
every day. And you will come at last to love the whole world with an all\uc0\u8208 \
embracing love. Love the animals: God has given them the rudiments of\
thought and joy untroubled. Do not trouble it, don\'92t harass them, don\'92t\
deprive them of their happiness, don\'92t work against God\'92s intent. Man, do\
not pride yourself on superiority to the animals; they are without sin,\
and you, with your greatness, defile the earth by your appearance on it,\
and leave the traces of your foulness after you\'97alas, it is true of almost\
every one of us! Love children especially, for they too are sinless like\
the angels; they live to soften and purify our hearts and as it were to\
guide us. Woe to him who offends a child! Father Anfim taught me to love\
children. The kind, silent man used often on our wanderings to spend the\
farthings given us on sweets and cakes for the children. He could not pass\
by a child without emotion. That\'92s the nature of the man.\
\
At some thoughts one stands perplexed, especially at the sight of men\'92s\
sin, and wonders whether one should use force or humble love. Always\
decide to use humble love. If you resolve on that once for all, you may\
subdue the whole world. Loving humility is marvelously strong, the\
strongest of all things, and there is nothing else like it.\
\
Every day and every hour, every minute, walk round yourself and watch\
yourself, and see that your image is a seemly one. You pass by a little\
child, you pass by, spiteful, with ugly words, with wrathful heart; you\
may not have noticed the child, but he has seen you, and your image,\
unseemly and ignoble, may remain in his defenseless heart. You don\'92t know\
it, but you may have sown an evil seed in him and it may grow, and all\
because you were not careful before the child, because you did not foster\
in yourself a careful, actively benevolent love. Brothers, love is a\
teacher; but one must know how to acquire it, for it is hard to acquire,\
it is dearly bought, it is won slowly by long labor. For we must love not\
only occasionally, for a moment, but for ever. Every one can love\
occasionally, even the wicked can.\
\
My brother asked the birds to forgive him; that sounds senseless, but it\
is right; for all is like an ocean, all is flowing and blending; a touch\
in one place sets up movement at the other end of the earth. It may be\
senseless to beg forgiveness of the birds, but birds would be happier at\
your side\'97a little happier, anyway\'97and children and all animals, if you\
were nobler than you are now. It\'92s all like an ocean, I tell you. Then you\
would pray to the birds too, consumed by an all\uc0\u8208 embracing love, in a sort\
of transport, and pray that they too will forgive you your sin. Treasure\
this ecstasy, however senseless it may seem to men.\
\
My friends, pray to God for gladness. Be glad as children, as the birds of\
heaven. And let not the sin of men confound you in your doings. Fear not\
that it will wear away your work and hinder its being accomplished. Do not\
say, \'93Sin is mighty, wickedness is mighty, evil environment is mighty, and\
we are lonely and helpless, and evil environment is wearing us away and\
hindering our good work from being done.\'94 Fly from that dejection,\
children! There is only one means of salvation, then take yourself and\
make yourself responsible for all men\'92s sins, that is the truth, you know,\
friends, for as soon as you sincerely make yourself responsible for\
everything and for all men, you will see at once that it is really so, and\
that you are to blame for every one and for all things. But throwing your\
own indolence and impotence on others you will end by sharing the pride of\
Satan and murmuring against God.\
\
Of the pride of Satan what I think is this: it is hard for us on earth to\
comprehend it, and therefore it is so easy to fall into error and to share\
it, even imagining that we are doing something grand and fine. Indeed,\
many of the strongest feelings and movements of our nature we cannot\
comprehend on earth. Let not that be a stumbling\uc0\u8208 block, and think not that\
it may serve as a justification to you for anything. For the Eternal Judge\
asks of you what you can comprehend and not what you cannot. You will know\
that yourself hereafter, for you will behold all things truly then and\
will not dispute them. On earth, indeed, we are as it were astray, and if\
it were not for the precious image of Christ before us, we should be\
undone and altogether lost, as was the human race before the flood. Much\
on earth is hidden from us, but to make up for that we have been given a\
precious mystic sense of our living bond with the other world, with the\
higher heavenly world, and the roots of our thoughts and feelings are not\
here but in other worlds. That is why the philosophers say that we cannot\
apprehend the reality of things on earth.\
\
God took seeds from different worlds and sowed them on this earth, and His\
garden grew up and everything came up that could come up, but what grows\
lives and is alive only through the feeling of its contact with other\
mysterious worlds. If that feeling grows weak or is destroyed in you, the\
heavenly growth will die away in you. Then you will be indifferent to life\
and even grow to hate it. That\'92s what I think.\
\
_(h) Can a Man judge his Fellow Creatures? Faith to the End_\
\
Remember particularly that you cannot be a judge of any one. For no one\
can judge a criminal, until he recognizes that he is just such a criminal\
as the man standing before him, and that he perhaps is more than all men\
to blame for that crime. When he understands that, he will be able to be a\
judge. Though that sounds absurd, it is true. If I had been righteous\
myself, perhaps there would have been no criminal standing before me. If\
you can take upon yourself the crime of the criminal your heart is\
judging, take it at once, suffer for him yourself, and let him go without\
reproach. And even if the law itself makes you his judge, act in the same\
spirit so far as possible, for he will go away and condemn himself more\
bitterly than you have done. If, after your kiss, he goes away untouched,\
mocking at you, do not let that be a stumbling\uc0\u8208 block to you. It shows his\
time has not yet come, but it will come in due course. And if it come not,\
no matter; if not he, then another in his place will understand and\
suffer, and judge and condemn himself, and the truth will be fulfilled.\
Believe that, believe it without doubt; for in that lies all the hope and\
faith of the saints.\
\
Work without ceasing. If you remember in the night as you go to sleep, \'93I\
have not done what I ought to have done,\'94 rise up at once and do it. If\
the people around you are spiteful and callous and will not hear you, fall\
down before them and beg their forgiveness; for in truth you are to blame\
for their not wanting to hear you. And if you cannot speak to them in\
their bitterness, serve them in silence and in humility, never losing\
hope. If all men abandon you and even drive you away by force, then when\
you are left alone fall on the earth and kiss it, water it with your tears\
and it will bring forth fruit even though no one has seen or heard you in\
your solitude. Believe to the end, even if all men went astray and you\
were left the only one faithful; bring your offering even then and praise\
God in your loneliness. And if two of you are gathered together\'97then there\
is a whole world, a world of living love. Embrace each other tenderly and\
praise God, for if only in you two His truth has been fulfilled.\
\
If you sin yourself and grieve even unto death for your sins or for your\
sudden sin, then rejoice for others, rejoice for the righteous man,\
rejoice that if you have sinned, he is righteous and has not sinned.\
\
If the evil\uc0\u8208 doing of men moves you to indignation and overwhelming\
distress, even to a desire for vengeance on the evil\uc0\u8208 doers, shun above all\
things that feeling. Go at once and seek suffering for yourself, as though\
you were yourself guilty of that wrong. Accept that suffering and bear it\
and your heart will find comfort, and you will understand that you too are\
guilty, for you might have been a light to the evil\uc0\u8208 doers, even as the one\
man sinless, and you were not a light to them. If you had been a light,\
you would have lightened the path for others too, and the evil\uc0\u8208 doer might\
perhaps have been saved by your light from his sin. And even though your\
light was shining, yet you see men were not saved by it, hold firm and\
doubt not the power of the heavenly light. Believe that if they were not\
saved, they will be saved hereafter. And if they are not saved hereafter,\
then their sons will be saved, for your light will not die even when you\
are dead. The righteous man departs, but his light remains. Men are always\
saved after the death of the deliverer. Men reject their prophets and slay\
them, but they love their martyrs and honor those whom they have slain.\
You are working for the whole, you are acting for the future. Seek no\
reward, for great is your reward on this earth: the spiritual joy which is\
only vouchsafed to the righteous man. Fear not the great nor the mighty,\
but be wise and ever serene. Know the measure, know the times, study that.\
When you are left alone, pray. Love to throw yourself on the earth and\
kiss it. Kiss the earth and love it with an unceasing, consuming love.\
Love all men, love everything. Seek that rapture and ecstasy. Water the\
earth with the tears of your joy and love those tears. Don\'92t be ashamed of\
that ecstasy, prize it, for it is a gift of God and a great one; it is not\
given to many but only to the elect.\
\
_(i) Of Hell and Hell Fire, a Mystic Reflection_\
\
Fathers and teachers, I ponder, \'93What is hell?\'94 I maintain that it is the\
suffering of being unable to love. Once in infinite existence,\
immeasurable in time and space, a spiritual creature was given on his\
coming to earth, the power of saying, \'93I am and I love.\'94 Once, only once,\
there was given him a moment of active _living_ love, and for that was\
earthly life given him, and with it times and seasons. And that happy\
creature rejected the priceless gift, prized it and loved it not, scorned\
it and remained callous. Such a one, having left the earth, sees Abraham\'92s\
bosom and talks with Abraham as we are told in the parable of the rich man\
and Lazarus, and beholds heaven and can go up to the Lord. But that is\
just his torment, to rise up to the Lord without ever having loved, to be\
brought close to those who have loved when he has despised their love. For\
he sees clearly and says to himself, \'93Now I have understanding, and though\
I now thirst to love, there will be nothing great, no sacrifice in my\
love, for my earthly life is over, and Abraham will not come even with a\
drop of living water (that is the gift of earthly active life) to cool the\
fiery thirst of spiritual love which burns in me now, though I despised it\
on earth; there is no more life for me and will be no more time! Even\
though I would gladly give my life for others, it can never be, for that\
life is passed which can be sacrificed for love, and now there is a gulf\
fixed between that life and this existence.\'94\
\
They talk of hell fire in the material sense. I don\'92t go into that mystery\
and I shun it. But I think if there were fire in material sense, they\
would be glad of it, for I imagine that in material agony, their still\
greater spiritual agony would be forgotten for a moment. Moreover, that\
spiritual agony cannot be taken from them, for that suffering is not\
external but within them. And if it could be taken from them, I think it\
would be bitterer still for the unhappy creatures. For even if the\
righteous in Paradise forgave them, beholding their torments, and called\
them up to heaven in their infinite love, they would only multiply their\
torments, for they would arouse in them still more keenly a flaming thirst\
for responsive, active and grateful love which is now impossible. In the\
timidity of my heart I imagine, however, that the very recognition of this\
impossibility would serve at last to console them. For accepting the love\
of the righteous together with the impossibility of repaying it, by this\
submissiveness and the effect of this humility, they will attain at last,\
as it were, to a certain semblance of that active love which they scorned\
in life, to something like its outward expression.... I am sorry, friends\
and brothers, that I cannot express this clearly. But woe to those who\
have slain themselves on earth, woe to the suicides! I believe that there\
can be none more miserable then they. They tell us that it is a sin to\
pray for them and outwardly the Church, as it were, renounces them, but in\
my secret heart I believe that we may pray even for them. Love can never\
be an offense to Christ. For such as those I have prayed inwardly all my\
life, I confess it, fathers and teachers, and even now I pray for them\
every day.\
\
Oh, there are some who remain proud and fierce even in hell, in spite of\
their certain knowledge and contemplation of the absolute truth; there are\
some fearful ones who have given themselves over to Satan and his proud\
spirit entirely. For such, hell is voluntary and ever consuming; they are\
tortured by their own choice. For they have cursed themselves, cursing God\
and life. They live upon their vindictive pride like a starving man in the\
desert sucking blood out of his own body. But they are never satisfied,\
and they refuse forgiveness, they curse God Who calls them. They cannot\
behold the living God without hatred, and they cry out that the God of\
life should be annihilated, that God should destroy Himself and His own\
creation. And they will burn in the fire of their own wrath for ever and\
yearn for death and annihilation. But they will not attain to death....\
\
                  \uc0\u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \
\
Here Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov\'92s manuscript ends. I repeat, it is\
incomplete and fragmentary. Biographical details, for instance, cover only\
Father Zossima\'92s earliest youth. Of his teaching and opinions we find\
brought together sayings evidently uttered on very different occasions.\
His utterances during the last few hours have not been kept separate from\
the rest, but their general character can be gathered from what we have in\
Alexey Fyodorovitch\'92s manuscript.\
\
The elder\'92s death came in the end quite unexpectedly. For although those\
who were gathered about him that last evening realized that his death was\
approaching, yet it was difficult to imagine that it would come so\
suddenly. On the contrary, his friends, as I observed already, seeing him\
that night apparently so cheerful and talkative, were convinced that there\
was at least a temporary change for the better in his condition. Even five\
minutes before his death, they said afterwards wonderingly, it was\
impossible to foresee it. He seemed suddenly to feel an acute pain in his\
chest, he turned pale and pressed his hands to his heart. All rose from\
their seats and hastened to him. But though suffering, he still looked at\
them with a smile, sank slowly from his chair on to his knees, then bowed\
his face to the ground, stretched out his arms and as though in joyful\
ecstasy, praying and kissing the ground, quietly and joyfully gave up his\
soul to God.\
\
The news of his death spread at once through the hermitage and reached the\
monastery. The nearest friends of the deceased and those whose duty it was\
from their position began to lay out the corpse according to the ancient\
ritual, and all the monks gathered together in the church. And before dawn\
the news of the death reached the town. By the morning all the town was\
talking of the event, and crowds were flocking from the town to the\
monastery. But this subject will be treated in the next book; I will only\
add here that before a day had passed something happened so unexpected, so\
strange, upsetting, and bewildering in its effect on the monks and the\
townspeople, that after all these years, that day of general suspense is\
still vividly remembered in the town.\
\
\
\
\
\
PART III\
\
\
\
\
Book VII. Alyosha\
\
\
\
Chapter I. The Breath Of Corruption\
\
\
The body of Father Zossima was prepared for burial according to the\
established ritual. As is well known, the bodies of dead monks and hermits\
are not washed. In the words of the Church Ritual: \'93If any one of the\
monks depart in the Lord, the monk designated (that is, whose office it\
is) shall wipe the body with warm water, making first the sign of the\
cross with a sponge on the forehead of the deceased, on the breast, on the\
hands and feet and on the knees, and that is enough.\'94 All this was done by\
Father Pa\'efssy, who then clothed the deceased in his monastic garb and\
wrapped him in his cloak, which was, according to custom, somewhat slit to\
allow of its being folded about him in the form of a cross. On his head he\
put a hood with an eight\uc0\u8208 cornered cross. The hood was left open and the\
dead man\'92s face was covered with black gauze. In his hands was put an ikon\
of the Saviour. Towards morning he was put in the coffin which had been\
made ready long before. It was decided to leave the coffin all day in the\
cell, in the larger room in which the elder used to receive his visitors\
and fellow monks. As the deceased was a priest and monk of the strictest\
rule, the Gospel, not the Psalter, had to be read over his body by monks\
in holy orders. The reading was begun by Father Iosif immediately after\
the requiem service. Father Pa\'efssy desired later on to read the Gospel all\
day and night over his dead friend, but for the present he, as well as the\
Father Superintendent of the Hermitage, was very busy and occupied, for\
something extraordinary, an unheard\uc0\u8208 of, even \'93unseemly\'94 excitement and\
impatient expectation began to be apparent in the monks, and the visitors\
from the monastery hostels, and the crowds of people flocking from the\
town. And as time went on, this grew more and more marked. Both the\
Superintendent and Father Pa\'efssy did their utmost to calm the general\
bustle and agitation.\
\
When it was fully daylight, some people began bringing their sick, in most\
cases children, with them from the town\'97as though they had been waiting\
expressly for this moment to do so, evidently persuaded that the dead\
elder\'92s remains had a power of healing, which would be immediately made\
manifest in accordance with their faith. It was only then apparent how\
unquestionably every one in our town had accepted Father Zossima during\
his lifetime as a great saint. And those who came were far from being all\
of the humbler classes.\
\
This intense expectation on the part of believers displayed with such\
haste, such openness, even with impatience and almost insistence,\
impressed Father Pa\'efssy as unseemly. Though he had long foreseen something\
of the sort, the actual manifestation of the feeling was beyond anything\
he had looked for. When he came across any of the monks who displayed this\
excitement, Father Pa\'efssy began to reprove them. \'93Such immediate\
expectation of something extraordinary,\'94 he said, \'93shows a levity,\
possible to worldly people but unseemly in us.\'94\
\
But little attention was paid him and Father Pa\'efssy noticed it uneasily.\
Yet he himself (if the whole truth must be told), secretly at the bottom\
of his heart, cherished almost the same hopes and could not but be aware\
of it, though he was indignant at the too impatient expectation around\
him, and saw in it light\uc0\u8208 mindedness and vanity. Nevertheless, it was\
particularly unpleasant to him to meet certain persons, whose presence\
aroused in him great misgivings. In the crowd in the dead man\'92s cell he\
noticed with inward aversion (for which he immediately reproached himself)\
the presence of Rakitin and of the monk from Obdorsk, who was still\
staying in the monastery. Of both of them Father Pa\'efssy felt for some\
reason suddenly suspicious\'97though, indeed, he might well have felt the\
same about others.\
\
The monk from Obdorsk was conspicuous as the most fussy in the excited\
crowd. He was to be seen everywhere; everywhere he was asking questions,\
everywhere he was listening, on all sides he was whispering with a\
peculiar, mysterious air. His expression showed the greatest impatience\
and even a sort of irritation.\
\
As for Rakitin, he, as appeared later, had come so early to the hermitage\
at the special request of Madame Hohlakov. As soon as that good\uc0\u8208 hearted\
but weak\uc0\u8208 minded woman, who could not herself have been admitted to the\
hermitage, waked and heard of the death of Father Zossima, she was\
overtaken with such intense curiosity that she promptly dispatched Rakitin\
to the hermitage, to keep a careful look out and report to her by letter\
every half\uc0\u8208 hour or so \'93_everything that takes place_.\'94 She regarded\
Rakitin as a most religious and devout young man. He was particularly\
clever in getting round people and assuming whatever part he thought most\
to their taste, if he detected the slightest advantage to himself from\
doing so.\
\
It was a bright, clear day, and many of the visitors were thronging about\
the tombs, which were particularly numerous round the church and scattered\
here and there about the hermitage. As he walked round the hermitage,\
Father Pa\'efssy remembered Alyosha and that he had not seen him for some\
time, not since the night. And he had no sooner thought of him than he at\
once noticed him in the farthest corner of the hermitage garden, sitting\
on the tombstone of a monk who had been famous long ago for his\
saintliness. He sat with his back to the hermitage and his face to the\
wall, and seemed to be hiding behind the tombstone. Going up to him,\
Father Pa\'efssy saw that he was weeping quietly but bitterly, with his face\
hidden in his hands, and that his whole frame was shaking with sobs.\
Father Pa\'efssy stood over him for a little.\
\
\'93Enough, dear son, enough, dear,\'94 he pronounced with feeling at last. \'93Why\
do you weep? Rejoice and weep not. Don\'92t you know that this is the\
greatest of his days? Think only where he is now, at this moment!\'94\
\
Alyosha glanced at him, uncovering his face, which was swollen with crying\
like a child\'92s, but turned away at once without uttering a word and hid\
his face in his hands again.\
\
\'93Maybe it is well,\'94 said Father Pa\'efssy thoughtfully; \'93weep if you must,\
Christ has sent you those tears.\'94\
\
\'93Your touching tears are but a relief to your spirit and will serve to\
gladden your dear heart,\'94 he added to himself, walking away from Alyosha,\
and thinking lovingly of him. He moved away quickly, however, for he felt\
that he too might weep looking at him.\
\
Meanwhile the time was passing; the monastery services and the requiems\
for the dead followed in their due course. Father Pa\'efssy again took Father\
Iosif\'92s place by the coffin and began reading the Gospel. But before three\
o\'92clock in the afternoon that something took place to which I alluded at\
the end of the last book, something so unexpected by all of us and so\
contrary to the general hope, that, I repeat, this trivial incident has\
been minutely remembered to this day in our town and all the surrounding\
neighborhood. I may add here, for myself personally, that I feel it almost\
repulsive to recall that event which caused such frivolous agitation and\
was such a stumbling\uc0\u8208 block to many, though in reality it was the most\
natural and trivial matter. I should, of course, have omitted all mention\
of it in my story, if it had not exerted a very strong influence on the\
heart and soul of the chief, though future, hero of my story, Alyosha,\
forming a crisis and turning\uc0\u8208 point in his spiritual development, giving a\
shock to his intellect, which finally strengthened it for the rest of his\
life and gave it a definite aim.\
\
And so, to return to our story. When before dawn they laid Father\
Zossima\'92s body in the coffin and brought it into the front room, the\
question of opening the windows was raised among those who were around the\
coffin. But this suggestion made casually by some one was unanswered and\
almost unnoticed. Some of those present may perhaps have inwardly noticed\
it, only to reflect that the anticipation of decay and corruption from the\
body of such a saint was an actual absurdity, calling for compassion (if\
not a smile) for the lack of faith and the frivolity it implied. For they\
expected something quite different.\
\
And, behold, soon after midday there were signs of something, at first\
only observed in silence by those who came in and out and were evidently\
each afraid to communicate the thought in his mind. But by three o\'92clock\
those signs had become so clear and unmistakable, that the news swiftly\
reached all the monks and visitors in the hermitage, promptly penetrated\
to the monastery, throwing all the monks into amazement, and finally, in\
the shortest possible time, spread to the town, exciting every one in it,\
believers and unbelievers alike. The unbelievers rejoiced, and as for the\
believers some of them rejoiced even more than the unbelievers, for \'93men\
love the downfall and disgrace of the righteous,\'94 as the deceased elder\
had said in one of his exhortations.\
\
The fact is that a smell of decomposition began to come from the coffin,\
growing gradually more marked, and by three o\'92clock it was quite\
unmistakable. In all the past history of our monastery, no such scandal\
could be recalled, and in no other circumstances could such a scandal have\
been possible, as showed itself in unseemly disorder immediately after\
this discovery among the very monks themselves. Afterwards, even many\
years afterwards, some sensible monks were amazed and horrified, when they\
recalled that day, that the scandal could have reached such proportions.\
For in the past, monks of very holy life had died, God\uc0\u8208 fearing old men,\
whose saintliness was acknowledged by all, yet from their humble coffins,\
too, the breath of corruption had come, naturally, as from all dead\
bodies, but that had caused no scandal nor even the slightest excitement.\
Of course there had been, in former times, saints in the monastery whose\
memory was carefully preserved and whose relics, according to tradition,\
showed no signs of corruption. This fact was regarded by the monks as\
touching and mysterious, and the tradition of it was cherished as\
something blessed and miraculous, and as a promise, by God\'92s grace, of\
still greater glory from their tombs in the future.\
\
One such, whose memory was particularly cherished, was an old monk, Job,\
who had died seventy years before at the age of a hundred and five. He had\
been a celebrated ascetic, rigid in fasting and silence, and his tomb was\
pointed out to all visitors on their arrival with peculiar respect and\
mysterious hints of great hopes connected with it. (That was the very tomb\
on which Father Pa\'efssy had found Alyosha sitting in the morning.) Another\
memory cherished in the monastery was that of the famous Father Varsonofy,\
who was only recently dead and had preceded Father Zossima in the\
eldership. He was reverenced during his lifetime as a crazy saint by all\
the pilgrims to the monastery. There was a tradition that both of these\
had lain in their coffins as though alive, that they had shown no signs of\
decomposition when they were buried and that there had been a holy light\
in their faces. And some people even insisted that a sweet fragrance came\
from their bodies.\
\
Yet, in spite of these edifying memories, it would be difficult to explain\
the frivolity, absurdity and malice that were manifested beside the coffin\
of Father Zossima. It is my private opinion that several different causes\
were simultaneously at work, one of which was the deeply\uc0\u8208 rooted hostility\
to the institution of elders as a pernicious innovation, an antipathy\
hidden deep in the hearts of many of the monks. Even more powerful was\
jealousy of the dead man\'92s saintliness, so firmly established during his\
lifetime that it was almost a forbidden thing to question it. For though\
the late elder had won over many hearts, more by love than by miracles,\
and had gathered round him a mass of loving adherents, none the less, in\
fact, rather the more on that account he had awakened jealousy and so had\
come to have bitter enemies, secret and open, not only in the monastery\
but in the world outside it. He did no one any harm, but \'93Why do they\
think him so saintly?\'94 And that question alone, gradually repeated, gave\
rise at last to an intense, insatiable hatred of him. That, I believe, was\
why many people were extremely delighted at the smell of decomposition\
which came so quickly, for not a day had passed since his death. At the\
same time there were some among those who had been hitherto reverently\
devoted to the elder, who were almost mortified and personally affronted\
by this incident. This was how the thing happened.\
\
As soon as signs of decomposition had begun to appear, the whole aspect of\
the monks betrayed their secret motives in entering the cell. They went\
in, stayed a little while and hastened out to confirm the news to the\
crowd of other monks waiting outside. Some of the latter shook their heads\
mournfully, but others did not even care to conceal the delight which\
gleamed unmistakably in their malignant eyes. And now no one reproached\
them for it, no one raised his voice in protest, which was strange, for\
the majority of the monks had been devoted to the dead elder. But it\
seemed as though God had in this case let the minority get the upper hand\
for a time.\
\
Visitors from outside, particularly of the educated class, soon went into\
the cell, too, with the same spying intent. Of the peasantry few went into\
the cell, though there were crowds of them at the gates of the hermitage.\
After three o\'92clock the rush of worldly visitors was greatly increased and\
this was no doubt owing to the shocking news. People were attracted who\
would not otherwise have come on that day and had not intended to come,\
and among them were some personages of high standing. But external decorum\
was still preserved and Father Pa\'efssy, with a stern face, continued firmly\
and distinctly reading aloud the Gospel, apparently not noticing what was\
taking place around him, though he had, in fact, observed something\
unusual long before. But at last the murmurs, first subdued but gradually\
louder and more confident, reached even him. \'93It shows God\'92s judgment is\
not as man\'92s,\'94 Father Pa\'efssy heard suddenly. The first to give utterance\
to this sentiment was a layman, an elderly official from the town, known\
to be a man of great piety. But he only repeated aloud what the monks had\
long been whispering. They had long before formulated this damning\
conclusion, and the worst of it was that a sort of triumphant satisfaction\
at that conclusion became more and more apparent every moment. Soon they\
began to lay aside even external decorum and almost seemed to feel they\
had a sort of right to discard it.\
\
\'93And for what reason can _this_ have happened,\'94 some of the monks said, at\
first with a show of regret; \'93he had a small frame and his flesh was dried\
up on his bones, what was there to decay?\'94\
\
\'93It must be a sign from heaven,\'94 others hastened to add, and their opinion\
was adopted at once without protest. For it was pointed out, too, that if\
the decomposition had been natural, as in the case of every dead sinner,\
it would have been apparent later, after a lapse of at least twenty\uc0\u8208 four\
hours, but this premature corruption \'93was in excess of nature,\'94 and so the\
finger of God was evident. It was meant for a sign. This conclusion seemed\
irresistible.\
\
Gentle Father Iosif, the librarian, a great favorite of the dead man\'92s,\
tried to reply to some of the evil speakers that \'93this is not held\
everywhere alike,\'94 and that the incorruptibility of the bodies of the just\
was not a dogma of the Orthodox Church, but only an opinion, and that even\
in the most Orthodox regions, at Athos for instance, they were not greatly\
confounded by the smell of corruption, and there the chief sign of the\
glorification of the saved was not bodily incorruptibility, but the color\
of the bones when the bodies have lain many years in the earth and have\
decayed in it. \'93And if the bones are yellow as wax, that is the great sign\
that the Lord has glorified the dead saint, if they are not yellow but\
black, it shows that God has not deemed him worthy of such glory\'97that is\
the belief in Athos, a great place, where the Orthodox doctrine has been\
preserved from of old, unbroken and in its greatest purity,\'94 said Father\
Iosif in conclusion.\
\
But the meek Father\'92s words had little effect and even provoked a mocking\
retort. \'93That\'92s all pedantry and innovation, no use listening to it,\'94 the\
monks decided. \'93We stick to the old doctrine, there are all sorts of\
innovations nowadays, are we to follow them all?\'94 added others.\
\
\'93We have had as many holy fathers as they had. There they are among the\
Turks, they have forgotten everything. Their doctrine has long been impure\
and they have no bells even,\'94 the most sneering added.\
\
Father Iosif walked away, grieving the more since he had put forward his\
own opinion with little confidence as though scarcely believing in it\
himself. He foresaw with distress that something very unseemly was\
beginning and that there were positive signs of disobedience. Little by\
little, all the sensible monks were reduced to silence like Father Iosif.\
And so it came to pass that all who loved the elder and had accepted with\
devout obedience the institution of the eldership were all at once\
terribly cast down and glanced timidly in one another\'92s faces, when they\
met. Those who were hostile to the institution of elders, as a novelty,\
held up their heads proudly. \'93There was no smell of corruption from the\
late elder Varsonofy, but a sweet fragrance,\'94 they recalled malignantly.\
\'93But he gained that glory not because he was an elder, but because he was\
a holy man.\'94\
\
And this was followed by a shower of criticism and even blame of Father\
Zossima. \'93His teaching was false; he taught that life is a great joy and\
not a vale of tears,\'94 said some of the more unreasonable. \'93He followed the\
fashionable belief, he did not recognize material fire in hell,\'94 others,\
still more unreasonable, added. \'93He was not strict in fasting, allowed\
himself sweet things, ate cherry jam with his tea, ladies used to send it\
to him. Is it for a monk of strict rule to drink tea?\'94 could be heard\
among some of the envious. \'93He sat in pride,\'94 the most malignant declared\
vindictively; \'93he considered himself a saint and he took it as his due\
when people knelt before him.\'94 \'93He abused the sacrament of confession,\'94\
the fiercest opponents of the institution of elders added in a malicious\
whisper. And among these were some of the oldest monks, strictest in their\
devotion, genuine ascetics, who had kept silent during the life of the\
deceased elder, but now suddenly unsealed their lips. And this was\
terrible, for their words had great influence on young monks who were not\
yet firm in their convictions. The monk from Obdorsk heard all this\
attentively, heaving deep sighs and nodding his head. \'93Yes, clearly Father\
Ferapont was right in his judgment yesterday,\'94 and at that moment Father\
Ferapont himself made his appearance, as though on purpose to increase the\
confusion.\
\
I have mentioned already that he rarely left his wooden cell by the\
apiary. He was seldom even seen at church and they overlooked this neglect\
on the ground of his craziness, and did not keep him to the rules binding\
on all the rest. But if the whole truth is to be told, they hardly had a\
choice about it. For it would have been discreditable to insist on\
burdening with the common regulations so great an ascetic, who prayed day\
and night (he even dropped asleep on his knees). If they had insisted, the\
monks would have said, \'93He is holier than all of us and he follows a rule\
harder than ours. And if he does not go to church, it\'92s because he knows\
when he ought to; he has his own rule.\'94 It was to avoid the chance of\
these sinful murmurs that Father Ferapont was left in peace.\
\
As every one was aware, Father Ferapont particularly disliked Father\
Zossima. And now the news had reached him in his hut that \'93God\'92s judgment\
is not the same as man\'92s,\'94 and that something had happened which was \'93in\
excess of nature.\'94 It may well be supposed that among the first to run to\
him with the news was the monk from Obdorsk, who had visited him the\
evening before and left his cell terror\uc0\u8208 stricken.\
\
I have mentioned above, that though Father Pa\'efssy, standing firm and\
immovable reading the Gospel over the coffin, could not hear nor see what\
was passing outside the cell, he gauged most of it correctly in his heart,\
for he knew the men surrounding him, well. He was not shaken by it, but\
awaited what would come next without fear, watching with penetration and\
insight for the outcome of the general excitement.\
\
Suddenly an extraordinary uproar in the passage in open defiance of\
decorum burst on his ears. The door was flung open and Father Ferapont\
appeared in the doorway. Behind him there could be seen accompanying him a\
crowd of monks, together with many people from the town. They did not,\
however, enter the cell, but stood at the bottom of the steps, waiting to\
see what Father Ferapont would say or do. For they felt with a certain\
awe, in spite of their audacity, that he had not come for nothing.\
Standing in the doorway, Father Ferapont raised his arms, and under his\
right arm the keen inquisitive little eyes of the monk from Obdorsk peeped\
in. He alone, in his intense curiosity, could not resist running up the\
steps after Father Ferapont. The others, on the contrary, pressed farther\
back in sudden alarm when the door was noisily flung open. Holding his\
hands aloft, Father Ferapont suddenly roared:\
\
\'93Casting out I cast out!\'94 and, turning in all directions, he began at once\
making the sign of the cross at each of the four walls and four corners of\
the cell in succession. All who accompanied Father Ferapont immediately\
understood his action. For they knew he always did this wherever he went,\
and that he would not sit down or say a word, till he had driven out the\
evil spirits.\
\
\'93Satan, go hence! Satan, go hence!\'94 he repeated at each sign of the cross.\
\'93Casting out I cast out,\'94 he roared again.\
\
He was wearing his coarse gown girt with a rope. His bare chest, covered\
with gray hair, could be seen under his hempen shirt. His feet were bare.\
As soon as he began waving his arms, the cruel irons he wore under his\
gown could be heard clanking.\
\
Father Pa\'efssy paused in his reading, stepped forward and stood before him\
waiting.\
\
\'93What have you come for, worthy Father? Why do you offend against good\
order? Why do you disturb the peace of the flock?\'94 he said at last,\
looking sternly at him.\
\
\'93What have I come for? You ask why? What is your faith?\'94 shouted Father\
Ferapont crazily. \'93I\'92ve come here to drive out your visitors, the unclean\
devils. I\'92ve come to see how many have gathered here while I have been\
away. I want to sweep them out with a birch broom.\'94\
\
\'93You cast out the evil spirit, but perhaps you are serving him yourself,\'94\
Father Pa\'efssy went on fearlessly. \'93And who can say of himself \'91I am holy\'92?\
Can you, Father?\'94\
\
\'93I am unclean, not holy. I would not sit in an arm\uc0\u8208 chair and would not\
have them bow down to me as an idol,\'94 thundered Father Ferapont. \'93Nowadays\
folk destroy the true faith. The dead man, your saint,\'94 he turned to the\
crowd, pointing with his finger to the coffin, \'93did not believe in devils.\
He gave medicine to keep off the devils. And so they have become as common\
as spiders in the corners. And now he has begun to stink himself. In that\
we see a great sign from God.\'94\
\
The incident he referred to was this. One of the monks was haunted in his\
dreams and, later on, in waking moments, by visions of evil spirits. When\
in the utmost terror he confided this to Father Zossima, the elder had\
advised continual prayer and rigid fasting. But when that was of no use,\
he advised him, while persisting in prayer and fasting, to take a special\
medicine. Many persons were shocked at the time and wagged their heads as\
they talked over it\'97and most of all Father Ferapont, to whom some of the\
censorious had hastened to report this \'93extraordinary\'94 counsel on the part\
of the elder.\
\
\'93Go away, Father!\'94 said Father Pa\'efssy, in a commanding voice, \'93it\'92s not\
for man to judge but for God. Perhaps we see here a \'91sign\'92 which neither\
you, nor I, nor any one of us is able to comprehend. Go, Father, and do\
not trouble the flock!\'94 he repeated impressively.\
\
\'93He did not keep the fasts according to the rule and therefore the sign\
has come. That is clear and it\'92s a sin to hide it,\'94 the fanatic, carried\
away by a zeal that outstripped his reason, would not be quieted. \'93He was\
seduced by sweetmeats, ladies brought them to him in their pockets, he\
sipped tea, he worshiped his belly, filling it with sweet things and his\
mind with haughty thoughts.... And for this he is put to shame....\'94\
\
\'93You speak lightly, Father.\'94 Father Pa\'efssy, too, raised his voice. \'93I\
admire your fasting and severities, but you speak lightly like some\
frivolous youth, fickle and childish. Go away, Father, I command you!\'94\
Father Pa\'efssy thundered in conclusion.\
\
\'93I will go,\'94 said Ferapont, seeming somewhat taken aback, but still as\
bitter. \'93You learned men! You are so clever you look down upon my\
humbleness. I came hither with little learning and here I have forgotten\
what I did know, God Himself has preserved me in my weakness from your\
subtlety.\'94\
\
Father Pa\'efssy stood over him, waiting resolutely. Father Ferapont paused\
and, suddenly leaning his cheek on his hand despondently, pronounced in a\
sing\uc0\u8208 song voice, looking at the coffin of the dead elder:\
\
\'93To\uc0\u8208 morrow they will sing over him \'91Our Helper and Defender\'92\'97a splendid\
anthem\'97and over me when I die all they\'92ll sing will be \'91What earthly\
joy\'92\'97a little canticle,\'94(6) he added with tearful regret. \'93You are proud\
and puffed up, this is a vain place!\'94 he shouted suddenly like a madman,\
and with a wave of his hand he turned quickly and quickly descended the\
steps. The crowd awaiting him below wavered; some followed him at once and\
some lingered, for the cell was still open, and Father Pa\'efssy, following\
Father Ferapont on to the steps, stood watching him. But the excited old\
fanatic was not completely silenced. Walking twenty steps away, he\
suddenly turned towards the setting sun, raised both his arms and, as\
though some one had cut him down, fell to the ground with a loud scream.\
\
\'93My God has conquered! Christ has conquered the setting sun!\'94 he shouted\
frantically, stretching up his hands to the sun, and falling face\
downwards on the ground, he sobbed like a little child, shaken by his\
tears and spreading out his arms on the ground. Then all rushed up to him;\
there were exclamations and sympathetic sobs ... a kind of frenzy seemed\
to take possession of them all.\
\
\'93This is the one who is a saint! This is the one who is a holy man!\'94 some\
cried aloud, losing their fear. \'93This is he who should be an elder,\'94\
others added malignantly.\
\
\'93He wouldn\'92t be an elder ... he would refuse ... he wouldn\'92t serve a\
cursed innovation ... he wouldn\'92t imitate their foolery,\'94 other voices\
chimed in at once. And it is hard to say how far they might have gone, but\
at that moment the bell rang summoning them to service. All began crossing\
themselves at once. Father Ferapont, too, got up and crossing himself went\
back to his cell without looking round, still uttering exclamations which\
were utterly incoherent. A few followed him, but the greater number\
dispersed, hastening to service. Father Pa\'efssy let Father Iosif read in\
his place and went down. The frantic outcries of bigots could not shake\
him, but his heart was suddenly filled with melancholy for some special\
reason and he felt that. He stood still and suddenly wondered, \'93Why am I\
sad even to dejection?\'94 and immediately grasped with surprise that his\
sudden sadness was due to a very small and special cause. In the crowd\
thronging at the entrance to the cell, he had noticed Alyosha and he\
remembered that he had felt at once a pang at heart on seeing him. \'93Can\
that boy mean so much to my heart now?\'94 he asked himself, wondering.\
\
At that moment Alyosha passed him, hurrying away, but not in the direction\
of the church. Their eyes met. Alyosha quickly turned away his eyes and\
dropped them to the ground, and from the boy\'92s look alone, Father Pa\'efssy\
guessed what a great change was taking place in him at that moment.\
\
\'93Have you, too, fallen into temptation?\'94 cried Father Pa\'efssy. \'93Can you be\
with those of little faith?\'94 he added mournfully.\
\
Alyosha stood still and gazed vaguely at Father Pa\'efssy, but quickly turned\
his eyes away again and again looked on the ground. He stood sideways and\
did not turn his face to Father Pa\'efssy, who watched him attentively.\
\
\'93Where are you hastening? The bell calls to service,\'94 he asked again, but\
again Alyosha gave no answer.\
\
\'93Are you leaving the hermitage? What, without asking leave, without asking\
a blessing?\'94\
\
Alyosha suddenly gave a wry smile, cast a strange, very strange, look at\
the Father to whom his former guide, the former sovereign of his heart and\
mind, his beloved elder, had confided him as he lay dying. And suddenly,\
still without speaking, waved his hand, as though not caring even to be\
respectful, and with rapid steps walked towards the gates away from the\
hermitage.\
\
\'93You will come back again!\'94 murmured Father Pa\'efssy, looking after him with\
sorrowful surprise.\
\
\
\
Chapter II. A Critical Moment\
\
\
Father Pa\'efssy, of course, was not wrong when he decided that his \'93dear\
boy\'94 would come back again. Perhaps indeed, to some extent, he penetrated\
with insight into the true meaning of Alyosha\'92s spiritual condition. Yet I\
must frankly own that it would be very difficult for me to give a clear\
account of that strange, vague moment in the life of the young hero I love\
so much. To Father Pa\'efssy\'92s sorrowful question, \'93Are you too with those of\
little faith?\'94 I could of course confidently answer for Alyosha, \'93No, he\
is not with those of little faith. Quite the contrary.\'94 Indeed, all his\
trouble came from the fact that he was of great faith. But still the\
trouble was there and was so agonizing that even long afterwards Alyosha\
thought of that sorrowful day as one of the bitterest and most fatal days\
of his life. If the question is asked: \'93Could all his grief and\
disturbance have been only due to the fact that his elder\'92s body had shown\
signs of premature decomposition instead of at once performing miracles?\'94\
I must answer without beating about the bush, \'93Yes, it certainly was.\'94 I\
would only beg the reader not to be in too great a hurry to laugh at my\
young hero\'92s pure heart. I am far from intending to apologize for him or\
to justify his innocent faith on the ground of his youth, or the little\
progress he had made in his studies, or any such reason. I must declare,\
on the contrary, that I have genuine respect for the qualities of his\
heart. No doubt a youth who received impressions cautiously, whose love\
was lukewarm, and whose mind was too prudent for his age and so of little\
value, such a young man might, I admit, have avoided what happened to my\
hero. But in some cases it is really more creditable to be carried away by\
an emotion, however unreasonable, which springs from a great love, than to\
be unmoved. And this is even truer in youth, for a young man who is always\
sensible is to be suspected and is of little worth\'97that\'92s my opinion!\
\
\'93But,\'94 reasonable people will exclaim perhaps, \'93every young man cannot\
believe in such a superstition and your hero is no model for others.\'94\
\
To this I reply again, \'93Yes! my hero had faith, a faith holy and\
steadfast, but still I am not going to apologize for him.\'94\
\
Though I declared above, and perhaps too hastily, that I should not\
explain or justify my hero, I see that some explanation is necessary for\
the understanding of the rest of my story. Let me say then, it was not a\
question of miracles. There was no frivolous and impatient expectation of\
miracles in his mind. And Alyosha needed no miracles at the time, for the\
triumph of some preconceived idea\'97oh, no, not at all\'97what he saw before\
all was one figure\'97the figure of his beloved elder, the figure of that\
holy man whom he revered with such adoration. The fact is that all the\
love that lay concealed in his pure young heart for every one and\
everything had, for the past year, been concentrated\'97and perhaps wrongly\
so\'97on one being, his beloved elder. It is true that being had for so long\
been accepted by him as his ideal, that all his young strength and energy\
could not but turn towards that ideal, even to the forgetting at the\
moment \'93of every one and everything.\'94 He remembered afterwards how, on\
that terrible day, he had entirely forgotten his brother Dmitri, about\
whom he had been so anxious and troubled the day before; he had forgotten,\
too, to take the two hundred roubles to Ilusha\'92s father, though he had so\
warmly intended to do so the preceding evening. But again it was not\
miracles he needed but only \'93the higher justice\'94 which had been in his\
belief outraged by the blow that had so suddenly and cruelly wounded his\
heart. And what does it signify that this \'93justice\'94 looked for by Alyosha\
inevitably took the shape of miracles to be wrought immediately by the\
ashes of his adored teacher? Why, every one in the monastery cherished the\
same thought and the same hope, even those whose intellects Alyosha\
revered, Father Pa\'efssy himself, for instance. And so Alyosha, untroubled\
by doubts, clothed his dreams too in the same form as all the rest. And a\
whole year of life in the monastery had formed the habit of this\
expectation in his heart. But it was justice, justice, he thirsted for,\
not simply miracles.\
\
And now the man who should, he believed, have been exalted above every one\
in the whole world, that man, instead of receiving the glory that was his\
due, was suddenly degraded and dishonored! What for? Who had judged him?\
Who could have decreed this? Those were the questions that wrung his\
inexperienced and virginal heart. He could not endure without\
mortification, without resentment even, that the holiest of holy men\
should have been exposed to the jeering and spiteful mockery of the\
frivolous crowd so inferior to him. Even had there been no miracles, had\
there been nothing marvelous to justify his hopes, why this indignity, why\
this humiliation, why this premature decay, \'93in excess of nature,\'94 as the\
spiteful monks said? Why this \'93sign from heaven,\'94 which they so\
triumphantly acclaimed in company with Father Ferapont, and why did they\
believe they had gained the right to acclaim it? Where is the finger of\
Providence? Why did Providence hide its face \'93at the most critical moment\'94\
(so Alyosha thought it), as though voluntarily submitting to the blind,\
dumb, pitiless laws of nature?\
\
That was why Alyosha\'92s heart was bleeding, and, of course, as I have said\
already, the sting of it all was that the man he loved above everything on\
earth should be put to shame and humiliated! This murmuring may have been\
shallow and unreasonable in my hero, but I repeat again for the third\
time\'97and am prepared to admit that it might be difficult to defend my\
feeling\'97I am glad that my hero showed himself not too reasonable at that\
moment, for any man of sense will always come back to reason in time, but,\
if love does not gain the upper hand in a boy\'92s heart at such an\
exceptional moment, when will it? I will not, however, omit to mention\
something strange, which came for a time to the surface of Alyosha\'92s mind\
at this fatal and obscure moment. This new something was the harassing\
impression left by the conversation with Ivan, which now persistently\
haunted Alyosha\'92s mind. At this moment it haunted him. Oh, it was not that\
something of the fundamental, elemental, so to speak, faith of his soul\
had been shaken. He loved his God and believed in Him steadfastly, though\
he was suddenly murmuring against Him. Yet a vague but tormenting and evil\
impression left by his conversation with Ivan the day before, suddenly\
revived again now in his soul and seemed forcing its way to the surface of\
his consciousness.\
\
It had begun to get dusk when Rakitin, crossing the pine copse from the\
hermitage to the monastery, suddenly noticed Alyosha, lying face downwards\
on the ground under a tree, not moving and apparently asleep. He went up\
and called him by his name.\
\
\'93You here, Alexey? Can you have\'97\'94 he began wondering but broke off. He had\
meant to say, \'93Can you have come to this?\'94\
\
Alyosha did not look at him, but from a slight movement Rakitin at once\
saw that he heard and understood him.\
\
\'93What\'92s the matter?\'94 he went on; but the surprise in his face gradually\
passed into a smile that became more and more ironical.\
\
\'93I say, I\'92ve been looking for you for the last two hours. You suddenly\
disappeared. What are you about? What foolery is this? You might just look\
at me...\'94\
\
Alyosha raised his head, sat up and leaned his back against the tree. He\
was not crying, but there was a look of suffering and irritability in his\
face. He did not look at Rakitin, however, but looked away to one side of\
him.\
\
\'93Do you know your face is quite changed? There\'92s none of your famous\
mildness to be seen in it. Are you angry with some one? Have they been\
ill\uc0\u8208 treating you?\'94\
\
\'93Let me alone,\'94 said Alyosha suddenly, with a weary gesture of his hand,\
still looking away from him.\
\
\'93Oho! So that\'92s how we are feeling! So you can shout at people like other\
mortals. That is a come\uc0\u8208 down from the angels. I say, Alyosha, you have\
surprised me, do you hear? I mean it. It\'92s long since I\'92ve been surprised\
at anything here. I always took you for an educated man....\'94\
\
Alyosha at last looked at him, but vaguely, as though scarcely\
understanding what he said.\
\
\'93Can you really be so upset simply because your old man has begun to\
stink? You don\'92t mean to say you seriously believed that he was going to\
work miracles?\'94 exclaimed Rakitin, genuinely surprised again.\
\
\'93I believed, I believe, I want to believe, and I will believe, what more\
do you want?\'94 cried Alyosha irritably.\
\
\'93Nothing at all, my boy. Damn it all! why, no schoolboy of thirteen\
believes in that now. But there.... So now you are in a temper with your\
God, you are rebelling against Him; He hasn\'92t given promotion, He hasn\'92t\
bestowed the order of merit! Eh, you are a set!\'94\
\
Alyosha gazed a long while with his eyes half closed at Rakitin, and there\
was a sudden gleam in his eyes ... but not of anger with Rakitin.\
\
\'93I am not rebelling against my God; I simply \'91don\'92t accept His world.\'92 \'94\
Alyosha suddenly smiled a forced smile.\
\
\'93How do you mean, you don\'92t accept the world?\'94 Rakitin thought a moment\
over his answer. \'93What idiocy is this?\'94\
\
Alyosha did not answer.\
\
\'93Come, enough nonsense, now to business. Have you had anything to eat to\uc0\u8208 \
day?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t remember.... I think I have.\'94\
\
\'93You need keeping up, to judge by your face. It makes one sorry to look at\
you. You didn\'92t sleep all night either, I hear, you had a meeting in\
there. And then all this bobbery afterwards. Most likely you\'92ve had\
nothing to eat but a mouthful of holy bread. I\'92ve got some sausage in my\
pocket; I\'92ve brought it from the town in case of need, only you won\'92t eat\
sausage....\'94\
\
\'93Give me some.\'94\
\
\'93I say! You are going it! Why, it\'92s a regular mutiny, with barricades!\
Well, my boy, we must make the most of it. Come to my place.... I\
shouldn\'92t mind a drop of vodka myself, I am tired to death. Vodka is going\
too far for you, I suppose ... or would you like some?\'94\
\
\'93Give me some vodka too.\'94\
\
\'93Hullo! You surprise me, brother!\'94 Rakitin looked at him in amazement.\
\'93Well, one way or another, vodka or sausage, this is a jolly fine chance\
and mustn\'92t be missed. Come along.\'94\
\
Alyosha got up in silence and followed Rakitin.\
\
\'93If your little brother Ivan could see this\'97wouldn\'92t he be surprised! By\
the way, your brother Ivan set off to Moscow this morning, did you know?\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 answered Alyosha listlessly, and suddenly the image of his brother\
Dmitri rose before his mind. But only for a minute, and though it reminded\
him of something that must not be put off for a moment, some duty, some\
terrible obligation, even that reminder made no impression on him, did not\
reach his heart and instantly faded out of his mind and was forgotten.\
But, a long while afterwards, Alyosha remembered this.\
\
\'93Your brother Ivan declared once that I was a \'91liberal booby with no\
talents whatsoever.\'92 Once you, too, could not resist letting me know I was\
\'91dishonorable.\'92 Well! I should like to see what your talents and sense of\
honor will do for you now.\'94 This phrase Rakitin finished to himself in a\
whisper.\
\
\'93Listen!\'94 he said aloud, \'93let\'92s go by the path beyond the monastery\
straight to the town. Hm! I ought to go to Madame Hohlakov\'92s by the way.\
Only fancy, I\'92ve written to tell her everything that happened, and would\
you believe it, she answered me instantly in pencil (the lady has a\
passion for writing notes) that \'91she would never have expected _such\
conduct_ from a man of such a reverend character as Father Zossima.\'92 That\
was her very word: \'91conduct.\'92 She is angry too. Eh, you are a set! Stay!\'94\
he cried suddenly again. He suddenly stopped and taking Alyosha by the\
shoulder made him stop too.\
\
\'93Do you know, Alyosha,\'94 he peeped inquisitively into his eyes, absorbed in\
a sudden new thought which had dawned on him, and though he was laughing\
outwardly he was evidently afraid to utter that new idea aloud, so\
difficult he still found it to believe in the strange and unexpected mood\
in which he now saw Alyosha. \'93Alyosha, do you know where we had better\
go?\'94 he brought out at last timidly, and insinuatingly.\
\
\'93I don\'92t care ... where you like.\'94\
\
\'93Let\'92s go to Grushenka, eh? Will you come?\'94 pronounced Rakitin at last,\
trembling with timid suspense.\
\
\'93Let\'92s go to Grushenka,\'94 Alyosha answered calmly, at once, and this prompt\
and calm agreement was such a surprise to Rakitin that he almost started\
back.\
\
\'93Well! I say!\'94 he cried in amazement, but seizing Alyosha firmly by the\
arm he led him along the path, still dreading that he would change his\
mind.\
\
They walked along in silence, Rakitin was positively afraid to talk.\
\
\'93And how glad she will be, how delighted!\'94 he muttered, but lapsed into\
silence again. And indeed it was not to please Grushenka he was taking\
Alyosha to her. He was a practical person and never undertook anything\
without a prospect of gain for himself. His object in this case was\
twofold, first a revengeful desire to see \'93the downfall of the righteous,\'94\
and Alyosha\'92s fall \'93from the saints to the sinners,\'94 over which he was\
already gloating in his imagination, and in the second place he had in\
view a certain material gain for himself, of which more will be said\
later.\
\
\'93So the critical moment has come,\'94 he thought to himself with spiteful\
glee, \'93and we shall catch it on the hop, for it\'92s just what we want.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter III. An Onion\
\
\
Grushenka lived in the busiest part of the town, near the cathedral\
square, in a small wooden lodge in the courtyard belonging to the house of\
the widow Morozov. The house was a large stone building of two stories,\
old and very ugly. The widow led a secluded life with her two unmarried\
nieces, who were also elderly women. She had no need to let her lodge, but\
every one knew that she had taken in Grushenka as a lodger, four years\
before, solely to please her kinsman, the merchant Samsonov, who was known\
to be the girl\'92s protector. It was said that the jealous old man\'92s object\
in placing his \'93favorite\'94 with the widow Morozov was that the old woman\
should keep a sharp eye on her new lodger\'92s conduct. But this sharp eye\
soon proved to be unnecessary, and in the end the widow Morozov seldom met\
Grushenka and did not worry her by looking after her in any way. It is\
true that four years had passed since the old man had brought the slim,\
delicate, shy, timid, dreamy, and sad girl of eighteen from the chief town\
of the province, and much had happened since then. Little was known of the\
girl\'92s history in the town and that little was vague. Nothing more had\
been learnt during the last four years, even after many persons had become\
interested in the beautiful young woman into whom Agrafena Alexandrovna\
had meanwhile developed. There were rumors that she had been at seventeen\
betrayed by some one, some sort of officer, and immediately afterwards\
abandoned by him. The officer had gone away and afterwards married, while\
Grushenka had been left in poverty and disgrace. It was said, however,\
that though Grushenka had been raised from destitution by the old man,\
Samsonov, she came of a respectable family belonging to the clerical\
class, that she was the daughter of a deacon or something of the sort.\
\
And now after four years the sensitive, injured and pathetic little orphan\
had become a plump, rosy beauty of the Russian type, a woman of bold and\
determined character, proud and insolent. She had a good head for\
business, was acquisitive, saving and careful, and by fair means or foul\
had succeeded, it was said, in amassing a little fortune. There was only\
one point on which all were agreed. Grushenka was not easily to be\
approached and except her aged protector there had not been one man who\
could boast of her favors during those four years. It was a positive fact,\
for there had been a good many, especially during the last two years, who\
had attempted to obtain those favors. But all their efforts had been in\
vain and some of these suitors had been forced to beat an undignified and\
even comic retreat, owing to the firm and ironical resistance they met\
from the strong\uc0\u8208 willed young person. It was known, too, that the young\
person had, especially of late, been given to what is called\
\'93speculation,\'94 and that she had shown marked abilities in that direction,\
so that many people began to say that she was no better than a Jew. It was\
not that she lent money on interest, but it was known, for instance, that\
she had for some time past, in partnership with old Karamazov, actually\
invested in the purchase of bad debts for a trifle, a tenth of their\
nominal value, and afterwards had made out of them ten times their value.\
\
The old widower Samsonov, a man of large fortune, was stingy and\
merciless. He tyrannized over his grown\uc0\u8208 up sons, but, for the last year\
during which he had been ill and lost the use of his swollen legs, he had\
fallen greatly under the influence of his prot\'e9g\'e9e, whom he had at first\
kept strictly and in humble surroundings, \'93on Lenten fare,\'94 as the wits\
said at the time. But Grushenka had succeeded in emancipating herself,\
while she established in him a boundless belief in her fidelity. The old\
man, now long since dead, had had a large business in his day and was also\
a noteworthy character, miserly and hard as flint. Though Grushenka\'92s hold\
upon him was so strong that he could not live without her (it had been so\
especially for the last two years), he did not settle any considerable\
fortune on her and would not have been moved to do so, if she had\
threatened to leave him. But he had presented her with a small sum, and\
even that was a surprise to every one when it became known.\
\
\'93You are a wench with brains,\'94 he said to her, when he gave her eight\
thousand roubles, \'93and you must look after yourself, but let me tell you\
that except your yearly allowance as before, you\'92ll get nothing more from\
me to the day of my death, and I\'92ll leave you nothing in my will either.\'94\
\
And he kept his word; he died and left everything to his sons, whom, with\
their wives and children, he had treated all his life as servants.\
Grushenka was not even mentioned in his will. All this became known\
afterwards. He helped Grushenka with his advice to increase her capital\
and put business in her way.\
\
When Fyodor Pavlovitch, who first came into contact with Grushenka over a\
piece of speculation, ended to his own surprise by falling madly in love\
with her, old Samsonov, gravely ill as he was, was immensely amused. It is\
remarkable that throughout their whole acquaintance Grushenka was\
absolutely and spontaneously open with the old man, and he seems to have\
been the only person in the world with whom she was so. Of late, when\
Dmitri too had come on the scene with his love, the old man left off\
laughing. On the contrary, he once gave Grushenka a stern and earnest\
piece of advice.\
\
\'93If you have to choose between the two, father or son, you\'92d better choose\
the old man, if only you make sure the old scoundrel will marry you and\
settle some fortune on you beforehand. But don\'92t keep on with the captain,\
you\'92ll get no good out of that.\'94\
\
These were the very words of the old profligate, who felt already that his\
death was not far off and who actually died five months later.\
\
I will note, too, in passing, that although many in our town knew of the\
grotesque and monstrous rivalry of the Karamazovs, father and son, the\
object of which was Grushenka, scarcely any one understood what really\
underlay her attitude to both of them. Even Grushenka\'92s two servants\
(after the catastrophe of which we will speak later) testified in court\
that she received Dmitri Fyodorovitch simply from fear because \'93he\
threatened to murder her.\'94 These servants were an old cook, invalidish and\
almost deaf, who came from Grushenka\'92s old home, and her granddaughter, a\
smart young girl of twenty, who performed the duties of a maid. Grushenka\
lived very economically and her surroundings were anything but luxurious.\
Her lodge consisted of three rooms furnished with mahogany furniture in\
the fashion of 1820, belonging to her landlady.\
\
It was quite dark when Rakitin and Alyosha entered her rooms, yet they\
were not lighted up. Grushenka was lying down in her drawing\uc0\u8208 room on the\
big, hard, clumsy sofa, with a mahogany back. The sofa was covered with\
shabby and ragged leather. Under her head she had two white down pillows\
taken from her bed. She was lying stretched out motionless on her back\
with her hands behind her head. She was dressed as though expecting some\
one, in a black silk dress, with a dainty lace fichu on her head, which\
was very becoming. Over her shoulders was thrown a lace shawl pinned with\
a massive gold brooch. She certainly was expecting some one. She lay as\
though impatient and weary, her face rather pale and her lips and eyes\
hot, restlessly tapping the arm of the sofa with the tip of her right\
foot. The appearance of Rakitin and Alyosha caused a slight excitement.\
From the hall they could hear Grushenka leap up from the sofa and cry out\
in a frightened voice, \'93Who\'92s there?\'94 But the maid met the visitors and at\
once called back to her mistress.\
\
\'93It\'92s not he, it\'92s nothing, only other visitors.\'94\
\
\'93What can be the matter?\'94 muttered Rakitin, leading Alyosha into the\
drawing\uc0\u8208 room.\
\
Grushenka was standing by the sofa as though still alarmed. A thick coil\
of her dark brown hair escaped from its lace covering and fell on her\
right shoulder, but she did not notice it and did not put it back till she\
had gazed at her visitors and recognized them.\
\
\'93Ah, it\'92s you, Rakitin? You quite frightened me. Whom have you brought?\
Who is this with you? Good heavens, you have brought him!\'94 she exclaimed,\
recognizing Alyosha.\
\
\'93Do send for candles!\'94 said Rakitin, with the free\uc0\u8208 and\u8208 easy air of a most\
intimate friend, who is privileged to give orders in the house.\
\
\'93Candles ... of course, candles.... Fenya, fetch him a candle.... Well,\
you have chosen a moment to bring him!\'94 she exclaimed again, nodding\
towards Alyosha, and turning to the looking\uc0\u8208 glass she began quickly\
fastening up her hair with both hands. She seemed displeased.\
\
\'93Haven\'92t I managed to please you?\'94 asked Rakitin, instantly almost\
offended.\
\
\'93You frightened me, Rakitin, that\'92s what it is.\'94 Grushenka turned with a\
smile to Alyosha. \'93Don\'92t be afraid of me, my dear Alyosha, you cannot\
think how glad I am to see you, my unexpected visitor. But you frightened\
me, Rakitin, I thought it was Mitya breaking in. You see, I deceived him\
just now, I made him promise to believe me and I told him a lie. I told\
him that I was going to spend the evening with my old man, Kuzma Kuzmitch,\
and should be there till late counting up his money. I always spend one\
whole evening a week with him making up his accounts. We lock ourselves in\
and he counts on the reckoning beads while I sit and put things down in\
the book. I am the only person he trusts. Mitya believes that I am there,\
but I came back and have been sitting locked in here, expecting some news.\
How was it Fenya let you in? Fenya, Fenya, run out to the gate, open it\
and look about whether the captain is to be seen! Perhaps he is hiding and\
spying, I am dreadfully frightened.\'94\
\
\'93There\'92s no one there, Agrafena Alexandrovna, I\'92ve just looked out, I keep\
running to peep through the crack, I am in fear and trembling myself.\'94\
\
\'93Are the shutters fastened, Fenya? And we must draw the curtains\'97that\'92s\
better!\'94 She drew the heavy curtains herself. \'93He\'92d rush in at once if he\
saw a light. I am afraid of your brother Mitya to\uc0\u8208 day, Alyosha.\'94\
\
Grushenka spoke aloud, and, though she was alarmed, she seemed very happy\
about something.\
\
\'93Why are you so afraid of Mitya to\uc0\u8208 day?\'94 inquired Rakitin. \'93I should have\
thought you were not timid with him, you\'92d twist him round your little\
finger.\'94\
\
\'93I tell you, I am expecting news, priceless news, so I don\'92t want Mitya at\
all. And he didn\'92t believe, I feel he didn\'92t, that I should stay at Kuzma\
Kuzmitch\'92s. He must be in his ambush now, behind Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s, in\
the garden, watching for me. And if he\'92s there, he won\'92t come here, so\
much the better! But I really have been to Kuzma Kuzmitch\'92s, Mitya\
escorted me there. I told him I should stay there till midnight, and I\
asked him to be sure to come at midnight to fetch me home. He went away\
and I sat ten minutes with Kuzma Kuzmitch and came back here again. Ugh, I\
was afraid, I ran for fear of meeting him.\'94\
\
\'93And why are you so dressed up? What a curious cap you\'92ve got on!\'94\
\
\'93How curious you are yourself, Rakitin! I tell you, I am expecting a\
message. If the message comes, I shall fly, I shall gallop away and you\
will see no more of me. That\'92s why I am dressed up, so as to be ready.\'94\
\
\'93And where are you flying to?\'94\
\
\'93If you know too much, you\'92ll get old too soon.\'94\
\
\'93Upon my word! You are highly delighted ... I\'92ve never seen you like this\
before. You are dressed up as if you were going to a ball.\'94 Rakitin looked\
her up and down.\
\
\'93Much you know about balls.\'94\
\
\'93And do you know much about them?\'94\
\
\'93I have seen a ball. The year before last, Kuzma Kuzmitch\'92s son was\
married and I looked on from the gallery. Do you suppose I want to be\
talking to you, Rakitin, while a prince like this is standing here. Such a\
visitor! Alyosha, my dear boy, I gaze at you and can\'92t believe my eyes.\
Good heavens, can you have come here to see me! To tell you the truth, I\
never had a thought of seeing you and I didn\'92t think that you would ever\
come and see me. Though this is not the moment now, I am awfully glad to\
see you. Sit down on the sofa, here, that\'92s right, my bright young moon. I\
really can\'92t take it in even now.... Eh, Rakitin, if only you had brought\
him yesterday or the day before! But I am glad as it is! Perhaps it\'92s\
better he has come now, at such a moment, and not the day before\
yesterday.\'94\
\
She gayly sat down beside Alyosha on the sofa, looking at him with\
positive delight. And she really was glad, she was not lying when she said\
so. Her eyes glowed, her lips laughed, but it was a good\uc0\u8208 hearted merry\
laugh. Alyosha had not expected to see such a kind expression in her\
face.... He had hardly met her till the day before, he had formed an\
alarming idea of her, and had been horribly distressed the day before by\
the spiteful and treacherous trick she had played on Katerina Ivanovna. He\
was greatly surprised to find her now altogether different from what he\
had expected. And, crushed as he was by his own sorrow, his eyes\
involuntarily rested on her with attention. Her whole manner seemed\
changed for the better since yesterday, there was scarcely any trace of\
that mawkish sweetness in her speech, of that voluptuous softness in her\
movements. Everything was simple and good\uc0\u8208 natured, her gestures were\
rapid, direct, confiding, but she was greatly excited.\
\
\'93Dear me, how everything comes together to\uc0\u8208 day!\'94 she chattered on again.\
\'93And why I am so glad to see you, Alyosha, I couldn\'92t say myself! If you\
ask me, I couldn\'92t tell you.\'94\
\
\'93Come, don\'92t you know why you\'92re glad?\'94 said Rakitin, grinning. \'93You used\
to be always pestering me to bring him, you\'92d some object, I suppose.\'94\
\
\'93I had a different object once, but now that\'92s over, this is not the\
moment. I say, I want you to have something nice. I am so good\uc0\u8208 natured\
now. You sit down, too, Rakitin; why are you standing? You\'92ve sat down\
already? There\'92s no fear of Rakitin\'92s forgetting to look after himself.\
Look, Alyosha, he\'92s sitting there opposite us, so offended that I didn\'92t\
ask him to sit down before you. Ugh, Rakitin is such a one to take\
offense!\'94 laughed Grushenka. \'93Don\'92t be angry, Rakitin, I\'92m kind to\uc0\u8208 day.\
Why are you so depressed, Alyosha? Are you afraid of me?" She peeped into\
his eyes with merry mockery\'94\
\
\'93He\'92s sad. The promotion has not been given,\'94 boomed Rakitin.\
\
\'93What promotion?\'94\
\
\'93His elder stinks.\'94\
\
\'93What? You are talking some nonsense, you want to say something nasty. Be\
quiet, you stupid! Let me sit on your knee, Alyosha, like this.\'94 She\
suddenly skipped forward and jumped, laughing, on his knee, like a\
nestling kitten, with her right arm about his neck. \'93I\'92ll cheer you up, my\
pious boy. Yes, really, will you let me sit on your knee? You won\'92t be\
angry? If you tell me, I\'92ll get off?\'94\
\
Alyosha did not speak. He sat afraid to move, he heard her words, \'93If you\
tell me, I\'92ll get off,\'94 but he did not answer. But there was nothing in\
his heart such as Rakitin, for instance, watching him malignantly from his\
corner, might have expected or fancied. The great grief in his heart\
swallowed up every sensation that might have been aroused, and, if only he\
could have thought clearly at that moment, he would have realized that he\
had now the strongest armor to protect him from every lust and temptation.\
Yet in spite of the vague irresponsiveness of his spiritual condition and\
the sorrow that overwhelmed him, he could not help wondering at a new and\
strange sensation in his heart. This woman, this \'93dreadful\'94 woman, had no\
terror for him now, none of that terror that had stirred in his soul at\
any passing thought of woman. On the contrary, this woman, dreaded above\
all women, sitting now on his knee, holding him in her arms, aroused in\
him now a quite different, unexpected, peculiar feeling, a feeling of the\
intensest and purest interest without a trace of fear, of his former\
terror. That was what instinctively surprised him.\
\
\'93You\'92ve talked nonsense enough,\'94 cried Rakitin, \'93you\'92d much better give us\
some champagne. You owe it me, you know you do!\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I really do. Do you know, Alyosha, I promised him champagne on the\
top of everything, if he\'92d bring you? I\'92ll have some too! Fenya, Fenya,\
bring us the bottle Mitya left! Look sharp! Though I am so stingy, I\'92ll\
stand a bottle, not for you, Rakitin, you\'92re a toadstool, but he is a\
falcon! And though my heart is full of something very different, so be it,\
I\'92ll drink with you. I long for some dissipation.\'94\
\
\'93But what is the matter with you? And what is this message, may I ask, or\
is it a secret?\'94 Rakitin put in inquisitively, doing his best to pretend\
not to notice the snubs that were being continually aimed at him.\
\
\'93Ech, it\'92s not a secret, and you know it, too,\'94 Grushenka said, in a voice\
suddenly anxious, turning her head towards Rakitin, and drawing a little\
away from Alyosha, though she still sat on his knee with her arm round his\
neck. \'93My officer is coming, Rakitin, my officer is coming.\'94\
\
\'93I heard he was coming, but is he so near?\'94\
\
\'93He is at Mokroe now; he\'92ll send a messenger from there, so he wrote; I\
got a letter from him to\uc0\u8208 day. I am expecting the messenger every minute.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t say so! Why at Mokroe?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s a long story, I\'92ve told you enough.\'94\
\
\'93Mitya\'92ll be up to something now\'97I say! Does he know or doesn\'92t he?\'94\
\
\'93He know! Of course he doesn\'92t. If he knew, there would be murder. But I\
am not afraid of that now, I am not afraid of his knife. Be quiet,\
Rakitin, don\'92t remind me of Dmitri Fyodorovitch, he has bruised my heart.\
And I don\'92t want to think of that at this moment. I can think of Alyosha\
here, I can look at Alyosha ... smile at me, dear, cheer up, smile at my\
foolishness, at my pleasure.... Ah, he\'92s smiling, he\'92s smiling! How kindly\
he looks at me! And you know, Alyosha, I\'92ve been thinking all this time\
you were angry with me, because of the day before yesterday, because of\
that young lady. I was a cur, that\'92s the truth.... But it\'92s a good thing\
it happened so. It was a horrid thing, but a good thing too.\'94 Grushenka\
smiled dreamily and a little cruel line showed in her smile. \'93Mitya told\
me that she screamed out that I \'91ought to be flogged.\'92 I did insult her\
dreadfully. She sent for me, she wanted to make a conquest of me, to win\
me over with her chocolate.... No, it\'92s a good thing it did end like\
that.\'94 She smiled again. \'93But I am still afraid of your being angry.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, that\'92s really true,\'94 Rakitin put in suddenly with genuine surprise.\
\'93Alyosha, she is really afraid of a chicken like you.\'94\
\
\'93He is a chicken to you, Rakitin ... because you\'92ve no conscience, that\'92s\
what it is! You see, I love him with all my soul, that\'92s how it is!\
Alyosha, do you believe I love you with all my soul?\'94\
\
\'93Ah, you shameless woman! She is making you a declaration, Alexey!\'94\
\
\'93Well, what of it, I love him!\'94\
\
\'93And what about your officer? And the priceless message from Mokroe?\'94\
\
\'93That is quite different.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s a woman\'92s way of looking at it!\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t you make me angry, Rakitin.\'94 Grushenka caught him up hotly. \'93This\
is quite different. I love Alyosha in a different way. It\'92s true, Alyosha,\
I had sly designs on you before. For I am a horrid, violent creature. But\
at other times I\'92ve looked upon you, Alyosha, as my conscience. I\'92ve kept\
thinking \'91how any one like that must despise a nasty thing like me.\'92 I\
thought that the day before yesterday, as I ran home from the young\
lady\'92s. I have thought of you a long time in that way, Alyosha, and Mitya\
knows, I\'92ve talked to him about it. Mitya understands. Would you believe\
it, I sometimes look at you and feel ashamed, utterly ashamed of\
myself.... And how, and since when, I began to think about you like that,\
I can\'92t say, I don\'92t remember....\'94\
\
Fenya came in and put a tray with an uncorked bottle and three glasses of\
champagne on the table.\
\
\'93Here\'92s the champagne!\'94 cried Rakitin. \'93You\'92re excited, Agrafena\
Alexandrovna, and not yourself. When you\'92ve had a glass of champagne,\
you\'92ll be ready to dance. Eh, they can\'92t even do that properly,\'94 he added,\
looking at the bottle. \'93The old woman\'92s poured it out in the kitchen and\
the bottle\'92s been brought in warm and without a cork. Well, let me have\
some, anyway.\'94\
\
He went up to the table, took a glass, emptied it at one gulp and poured\
himself out another.\
\
\'93One doesn\'92t often stumble upon champagne,\'94 he said, licking his lips.\
\'93Now, Alyosha, take a glass, show what you can do! What shall we drink to?\
The gates of paradise? Take a glass, Grushenka, you drink to the gates of\
paradise, too.\'94\
\
\'93What gates of paradise?\'94\
\
She took a glass, Alyosha took his, tasted it and put it back.\
\
\'93No, I\'92d better not,\'94 he smiled gently.\
\
\'93And you bragged!\'94 cried Rakitin.\
\
\'93Well, if so, I won\'92t either,\'94 chimed in Grushenka, \'93I really don\'92t want\
any. You can drink the whole bottle alone, Rakitin. If Alyosha has some, I\
will.\'94\
\
\'93What touching sentimentality!\'94 said Rakitin tauntingly; \'93and she\'92s\
sitting on his knee, too! He\'92s got something to grieve over, but what\'92s\
the matter with you? He is rebelling against his God and ready to eat\
sausage....\'94\
\
\'93How so?\'94\
\
\'93His elder died to\uc0\u8208 day, Father Zossima, the saint.\'94\
\
\'93So Father Zossima is dead,\'94 cried Grushenka. \'93Good God, I did not know!\'94\
She crossed herself devoutly. \'93Goodness, what have I been doing, sitting\
on his knee like this at such a moment!\'94 She started up as though in\
dismay, instantly slipped off his knee and sat down on the sofa.\
\
Alyosha bent a long wondering look upon her and a light seemed to dawn in\
his face.\
\
\'93Rakitin,\'94 he said suddenly, in a firm and loud voice; \'93don\'92t taunt me\
with having rebelled against God. I don\'92t want to feel angry with you, so\
you must be kinder, too, I\'92ve lost a treasure such as you have never had,\
and you cannot judge me now. You had much better look at her\'97do you see\
how she has pity on me? I came here to find a wicked soul\'97I felt drawn to\
evil because I was base and evil myself, and I\'92ve found a true sister, I\
have found a treasure\'97a loving heart. She had pity on me just now....\
Agrafena Alexandrovna, I am speaking of you. You\'92ve raised my soul from\
the depths.\'94\
\
Alyosha\'92s lips were quivering and he caught his breath.\
\
\'93She has saved you, it seems,\'94 laughed Rakitin spitefully. \'93And she meant\
to get you in her clutches, do you realize that?\'94\
\
\'93Stay, Rakitin.\'94 Grushenka jumped up. \'93Hush, both of you. Now I\'92ll tell\
you all about it. Hush, Alyosha, your words make me ashamed, for I am bad\
and not good\'97that\'92s what I am. And you hush, Rakitin, because you are\
telling lies. I had the low idea of trying to get him in my clutches, but\
now you are lying, now it\'92s all different. And don\'92t let me hear anything\
more from you, Rakitin.\'94\
\
All this Grushenka said with extreme emotion.\
\
\'93They are both crazy,\'94 said Rakitin, looking at them with amazement. \'93I\
feel as though I were in a madhouse. They\'92re both getting so feeble\
they\'92ll begin crying in a minute.\'94\
\
\'93I shall begin to cry, I shall,\'94 repeated Grushenka. \'93He called me his\
sister and I shall never forget that. Only let me tell you, Rakitin,\
though I am bad, I did give away an onion.\'94\
\
\'93An onion? Hang it all, you really are crazy.\'94\
\
Rakitin wondered at their enthusiasm. He was aggrieved and annoyed, though\
he might have reflected that each of them was just passing through a\
spiritual crisis such as does not come often in a lifetime. But though\
Rakitin was very sensitive about everything that concerned himself, he was\
very obtuse as regards the feelings and sensations of others\'97partly from\
his youth and inexperience, partly from his intense egoism.\
\
\'93You see, Alyosha,\'94 Grushenka turned to him with a nervous laugh. \'93I was\
boasting when I told Rakitin I had given away an onion, but it\'92s not to\
boast I tell you about it. It\'92s only a story, but it\'92s a nice story. I\
used to hear it when I was a child from Matryona, my cook, who is still\
with me. It\'92s like this. Once upon a time there was a peasant woman and a\
very wicked woman she was. And she died and did not leave a single good\
deed behind. The devils caught her and plunged her into the lake of fire.\
So her guardian angel stood and wondered what good deed of hers he could\
remember to tell to God; \'91She once pulled up an onion in her garden,\'92 said\
he, \'91and gave it to a beggar woman.\'92 And God answered: \'91You take that\
onion then, hold it out to her in the lake, and let her take hold and be\
pulled out. And if you can pull her out of the lake, let her come to\
Paradise, but if the onion breaks, then the woman must stay where she is.\'92\
The angel ran to the woman and held out the onion to her. \'91Come,\'92 said he,\
\'91catch hold and I\'92ll pull you out.\'92 And he began cautiously pulling her\
out. He had just pulled her right out, when the other sinners in the lake,\
seeing how she was being drawn out, began catching hold of her so as to be\
pulled out with her. But she was a very wicked woman and she began kicking\
them. \'91I\'92m to be pulled out, not you. It\'92s my onion, not yours.\'92 As soon\
as she said that, the onion broke. And the woman fell into the lake and\
she is burning there to this day. So the angel wept and went away. So\
that\'92s the story, Alyosha; I know it by heart, for I am that wicked woman\
myself. I boasted to Rakitin that I had given away an onion, but to you\
I\'92ll say: \'91I\'92ve done nothing but give away one onion all my life, that\'92s\
the only good deed I\'92ve done.\'92 So don\'92t praise me, Alyosha, don\'92t think me\
good, I am bad, I am a wicked woman and you make me ashamed if you praise\
me. Eh, I must confess everything. Listen, Alyosha. I was so anxious to\
get hold of you that I promised Rakitin twenty\uc0\u8208 five roubles if he would\
bring you to me. Stay, Rakitin, wait!\'94\
\
She went with rapid steps to the table, opened a drawer, pulled out a\
purse and took from it a twenty\uc0\u8208 five rouble note.\
\
\'93What nonsense! What nonsense!\'94 cried Rakitin, disconcerted.\
\
\'93Take it. Rakitin, I owe it you, there\'92s no fear of your refusing it, you\
asked for it yourself.\'94 And she threw the note to him.\
\
\'93Likely I should refuse it,\'94 boomed Rakitin, obviously abashed, but\
carrying off his confusion with a swagger. \'93That will come in very handy;\
fools are made for wise men\'92s profit.\'94\
\
\'93And now hold your tongue, Rakitin, what I am going to say now is not for\
your ears. Sit down in that corner and keep quiet. You don\'92t like us, so\
hold your tongue.\'94\
\
\'93What should I like you for?\'94 Rakitin snarled, not concealing his ill\uc0\u8208 \
humor. He put the twenty\uc0\u8208 five rouble note in his pocket and he felt\
ashamed at Alyosha\'92s seeing it. He had reckoned on receiving his payment\
later, without Alyosha\'92s knowing of it, and now, feeling ashamed, he lost\
his temper. Till that moment he had thought it discreet not to contradict\
Grushenka too flatly in spite of her snubbing, since he had something to\
get out of her. But now he, too, was angry:\
\
\'93One loves people for some reason, but what have either of you done for\
me?\'94\
\
\'93You should love people without a reason, as Alyosha does.\'94\
\
\'93How does he love you? How has he shown it, that you make such a fuss\
about it?\'94\
\
Grushenka was standing in the middle of the room; she spoke with heat and\
there were hysterical notes in her voice.\
\
\'93Hush, Rakitin, you know nothing about us! And don\'92t dare to speak to me\
like that again. How dare you be so familiar! Sit in that corner and be\
quiet, as though you were my footman! And now, Alyosha, I\'92ll tell you the\
whole truth, that you may see what a wretch I am! I am not talking to\
Rakitin, but to you. I wanted to ruin you, Alyosha, that\'92s the holy truth;\
I quite meant to. I wanted to so much, that I bribed Rakitin to bring you.\
And why did I want to do such a thing? You knew nothing about it, Alyosha,\
you turned away from me; if you passed me, you dropped your eyes. And I\'92ve\
looked at you a hundred times before to\uc0\u8208 day; I began asking every one\
about you. Your face haunted my heart. \'91He despises me,\'92 I thought; \'91he\
won\'92t even look at me.\'92 And I felt it so much at last that I wondered at\
myself for being so frightened of a boy. I\'92ll get him in my clutches and\
laugh at him. I was full of spite and anger. Would you believe it, nobody\
here dares talk or think of coming to Agrafena Alexandrovna with any evil\
purpose. Old Kuzma is the only man I have anything to do with here; I was\
bound and sold to him; Satan brought us together, but there has been no\
one else. But looking at you, I thought, I\'92ll get him in my clutches and\
laugh at him. You see what a spiteful cur I am, and you called me your\
sister! And now that man who wronged me has come; I sit here waiting for a\
message from him. And do you know what that man has been to me? Five years\
ago, when Kuzma brought me here, I used to shut myself up, that no one\
might have sight or sound of me. I was a silly slip of a girl; I used to\
sit here sobbing; I used to lie awake all night, thinking: \'91Where is he\
now, the man who wronged me? He is laughing at me with another woman, most\
likely. If only I could see him, if I could meet him again, I\'92d pay him\
out, I\'92d pay him out!\'92 At night I used to lie sobbing into my pillow in\
the dark, and I used to brood over it; I used to tear my heart on purpose\
and gloat over my anger. \'91I\'92ll pay him out, I\'92ll pay him out!\'92 That\'92s what\
I used to cry out in the dark. And when I suddenly thought that I should\
really do nothing to him, and that he was laughing at me then, or perhaps\
had utterly forgotten me, I would fling myself on the floor, melt into\
helpless tears, and lie there shaking till dawn. In the morning I would\
get up more spiteful than a dog, ready to tear the whole world to pieces.\
And then what do you think? I began saving money, I became hard\uc0\u8208 hearted,\
grew stout\'97grew wiser, would you say? No, no one in the whole world sees\
it, no one knows it, but when night comes on, I sometimes lie as I did\
five years ago, when I was a silly girl, clenching my teeth and crying all\
night, thinking, \'91I\'92ll pay him out, I\'92ll pay him out!\'92 Do you hear? Well\
then, now you understand me. A month ago a letter came to me\'97he was\
coming, he was a widower, he wanted to see me. It took my breath away;\
then I suddenly thought: \'91If he comes and whistles to call me, I shall\
creep back to him like a beaten dog.\'92 I couldn\'92t believe myself. Am I so\
abject? Shall I run to him or not? And I\'92ve been in such a rage with\
myself all this month that I am worse than I was five years ago. Do you\
see now, Alyosha, what a violent, vindictive creature I am? I have shown\
you the whole truth! I played with Mitya to keep me from running to that\
other. Hush, Rakitin, it\'92s not for you to judge me, I am not speaking to\
you. Before you came in, I was lying here waiting, brooding, deciding my\
whole future life, and you can never know what was in my heart. Yes,\
Alyosha, tell your young lady not to be angry with me for what happened\
the day before yesterday.... Nobody in the whole world knows what I am\
going through now, and no one ever can know.... For perhaps I shall take a\
knife with me to\uc0\u8208 day, I can\'92t make up my mind ...\'94\
\
And at this \'93tragic\'94 phrase Grushenka broke down, hid her face in her\
hands, flung herself on the sofa pillows, and sobbed like a little child.\
\
Alyosha got up and went to Rakitin.\
\
\'93Misha,\'94 he said, \'93don\'92t be angry. She wounded you, but don\'92t be angry.\
You heard what she said just now? You mustn\'92t ask too much of human\
endurance, one must be merciful.\'94\
\
Alyosha said this at the instinctive prompting of his heart. He felt\
obliged to speak and he turned to Rakitin. If Rakitin had not been there,\
he would have spoken to the air. But Rakitin looked at him ironically and\
Alyosha stopped short.\
\
\'93You were so primed up with your elder\'92s teaching last night that now you\
have to let it off on me, Alexey, man of God!\'94 said Rakitin, with a smile\
of hatred.\
\
\'93Don\'92t laugh, Rakitin, don\'92t smile, don\'92t talk of the dead\'97he was better\
than any one in the world!\'94 cried Alyosha, with tears in his voice. \'93I\
didn\'92t speak to you as a judge but as the lowest of the judged. What am I\
beside her? I came here seeking my ruin, and said to myself, \'91What does it\
matter?\'92 in my cowardliness, but she, after five years in torment, as soon\
as any one says a word from the heart to her\'97it makes her forget\
everything, forgive everything, in her tears! The man who has wronged her\
has come back, he sends for her and she forgives him everything, and\
hastens joyfully to meet him and she won\'92t take a knife with her. She\
won\'92t! No, I am not like that. I don\'92t know whether you are, Misha, but I\
am not like that. It\'92s a lesson to me.... She is more loving than we....\
Have you heard her speak before of what she has just told us? No, you\
haven\'92t; if you had, you\'92d have understood her long ago ... and the person\
insulted the day before yesterday must forgive her, too! She will, when\
she knows ... and she shall know.... This soul is not yet at peace with\
itself, one must be tender with it ... there may be a treasure in that\
soul....\'94\
\
Alyosha stopped, because he caught his breath. In spite of his ill\uc0\u8208 humor\
Rakitin looked at him with astonishment. He had never expected such a\
tirade from the gentle Alyosha.\
\
\'93She\'92s found some one to plead her cause! Why, are you in love with her?\
Agrafena Alexandrovna, our monk\'92s really in love with you, you\'92ve made a\
conquest!\'94 he cried, with a coarse laugh.\
\
Grushenka lifted her head from the pillow and looked at Alyosha with a\
tender smile shining on her tear\uc0\u8208 stained face.\
\
\'93Let him alone, Alyosha, my cherub; you see what he is, he is not a person\
for you to speak to. Mihail Osipovitch,\'94 she turned to Rakitin, \'93I meant\
to beg your pardon for being rude to you, but now I don\'92t want to.\
Alyosha, come to me, sit down here.\'94 She beckoned to him with a happy\
smile. \'93That\'92s right, sit here. Tell me,\'94 she shook him by the hand and\
peeped into his face, smiling, \'93tell me, do I love that man or not? the\
man who wronged me, do I love him or not? Before you came, I lay here in\
the dark, asking my heart whether I loved him. Decide for me, Alyosha, the\
time has come, it shall be as you say. Am I to forgive him or not?\'94\
\
\'93But you have forgiven him already,\'94 said Alyosha, smiling.\
\
\'93Yes, I really have forgiven him,\'94 Grushenka murmured thoughtfully. \'93What\
an abject heart! To my abject heart!\'94 She snatched up a glass from the\
table, emptied it at a gulp, lifted it in the air and flung it on the\
floor. The glass broke with a crash. A little cruel line came into her\
smile.\
\
\'93Perhaps I haven\'92t forgiven him, though,\'94 she said, with a sort of menace\
in her voice, and she dropped her eyes to the ground as though she were\
talking to herself. \'93Perhaps my heart is only getting ready to forgive. I\
shall struggle with my heart. You see, Alyosha, I\'92ve grown to love my\
tears in these five years.... Perhaps I only love my resentment, not him\
...\'94\
\
\'93Well, I shouldn\'92t care to be in his shoes,\'94 hissed Rakitin.\
\
\'93Well, you won\'92t be, Rakitin, you\'92ll never be in his shoes. You shall\
black my shoes, Rakitin, that\'92s the place you are fit for. You\'92ll never\
get a woman like me ... and he won\'92t either, perhaps ...\'94\
\
\'93Won\'92t he? Then why are you dressed up like that?\'94 said Rakitin, with a\
venomous sneer.\
\
\'93Don\'92t taunt me with dressing up, Rakitin, you don\'92t know all that is in\
my heart! If I choose to tear off my finery, I\'92ll tear it off at once,\
this minute,\'94 she cried in a resonant voice. \'93You don\'92t know what that\
finery is for, Rakitin! Perhaps I shall see him and say: \'91Have you ever\
seen me look like this before?\'92 He left me a thin, consumptive cry\uc0\u8208 baby of\
seventeen. I\'92ll sit by him, fascinate him and work him up. \'91Do you see\
what I am like now?\'92 I\'92ll say to him; \'91well, and that\'92s enough for you, my\
dear sir, there\'92s many a slip twixt the cup and the lip!\'92 That may be what\
the finery is for, Rakitin.\'94 Grushenka finished with a malicious laugh.\
\'93I\'92m violent and resentful, Alyosha, I\'92ll tear off my finery, I\'92ll destroy\
my beauty, I\'92ll scorch my face, slash it with a knife, and turn beggar. If\
I choose, I won\'92t go anywhere now to see any one. If I choose, I\'92ll send\
Kuzma back all he has ever given me, to\uc0\u8208 morrow, and all his money and I\'92ll\
go out charing for the rest of my life. You think I wouldn\'92t do it,\
Rakitin, that I would not dare to do it? I would, I would, I could do it\
directly, only don\'92t exasperate me ... and I\'92ll send him about his\
business, I\'92ll snap my fingers in his face, he shall never see me again!\'94\
\
She uttered the last words in an hysterical scream, but broke down again,\
hid her face in her hands, buried it in the pillow and shook with sobs.\
\
Rakitin got up.\
\
\'93It\'92s time we were off,\'94 he said, \'93it\'92s late, we shall be shut out of the\
monastery.\'94\
\
Grushenka leapt up from her place.\
\
\'93Surely you don\'92t want to go, Alyosha!\'94 she cried, in mournful surprise.\
\'93What are you doing to me? You\'92ve stirred up my feeling, tortured me, and\
now you\'92ll leave me to face this night alone!\'94\
\
\'93He can hardly spend the night with you! Though if he wants to, let him!\
I\'92ll go alone,\'94 Rakitin scoffed jeeringly.\
\
\'93Hush, evil tongue!\'94 Grushenka cried angrily at him; \'93you never said such\
words to me as he has come to say.\'94\
\
\'93What has he said to you so special?\'94 asked Rakitin irritably.\
\
\'93I can\'92t say, I don\'92t know. I don\'92t know what he said to me, it went\
straight to my heart; he has wrung my heart.... He is the first, the only\
one who has pitied me, that\'92s what it is. Why did you not come before, you\
angel?\'94 She fell on her knees before him as though in a sudden frenzy.\
\'93I\'92ve been waiting all my life for some one like you, I knew that some one\
like you would come and forgive me. I believed that, nasty as I am, some\
one would really love me, not only with a shameful love!\'94\
\
\'93What have I done to you?\'94 answered Alyosha, bending over her with a\
tender smile, and gently taking her by the hands; \'93I only gave you an\
onion, nothing but a tiny little onion, that was all!\'94\
\
He was moved to tears himself as he said it. At that moment there was a\
sudden noise in the passage, some one came into the hall. Grushenka jumped\
up, seeming greatly alarmed. Fenya ran noisily into the room, crying out:\
\
\'93Mistress, mistress darling, a messenger has galloped up,\'94 she cried,\
breathless and joyful. \'93A carriage from Mokroe for you, Timofey the\
driver, with three horses, they are just putting in fresh horses.... A\
letter, here\'92s the letter, mistress.\'94\
\
A letter was in her hand and she waved it in the air all the while she\
talked. Grushenka snatched the letter from her and carried it to the\
candle. It was only a note, a few lines. She read it in one instant.\
\
\'93He has sent for me,\'94 she cried, her face white and distorted, with a wan\
smile; \'93he whistles! Crawl back, little dog!\'94\
\
But only for one instant she stood as though hesitating; suddenly the\
blood rushed to her head and sent a glow to her cheeks.\
\
\'93I will go,\'94 she cried; \'93five years of my life! Good\uc0\u8208 by! Good\u8208 by, Alyosha,\
my fate is sealed. Go, go, leave me all of you, don\'92t let me see you\
again! Grushenka is flying to a new life.... Don\'92t you remember evil\
against me either, Rakitin. I may be going to my death! Ugh! I feel as\
though I were drunk!\'94\
\
She suddenly left them and ran into her bedroom.\
\
\'93Well, she has no thoughts for us now!\'94 grumbled Rakitin. \'93Let\'92s go, or we\
may hear that feminine shriek again. I am sick of all these tears and\
cries.\'94\
\
Alyosha mechanically let himself be led out. In the yard stood a covered\
cart. Horses were being taken out of the shafts, men were running to and\
fro with a lantern. Three fresh horses were being led in at the open gate.\
But when Alyosha and Rakitin reached the bottom of the steps, Grushenka\'92s\
bedroom window was suddenly opened and she called in a ringing voice after\
Alyosha:\
\
\'93Alyosha, give my greetings to your brother Mitya and tell him not to\
remember evil against me, though I have brought him misery. And tell him,\
too, in my words: \'91Grushenka has fallen to a scoundrel, and not to you,\
noble heart.\'92 And add, too, that Grushenka loved him only one hour, only\
one short hour she loved him\'97so let him remember that hour all his\
life\'97say, \'91Grushenka tells you to!\'92 \'94\
\
She ended in a voice full of sobs. The window was shut with a slam.\
\
\'93H\'92m, h\'92m!\'94 growled Rakitin, laughing, \'93she murders your brother Mitya and\
then tells him to remember it all his life! What ferocity!\'94\
\
Alyosha made no reply, he seemed not to have heard. He walked fast beside\
Rakitin as though in a terrible hurry. He was lost in thought and moved\
mechanically. Rakitin felt a sudden twinge as though he had been touched\
on an open wound. He had expected something quite different by bringing\
Grushenka and Alyosha together. Something very different from what he had\
hoped for had happened.\
\
\'93He is a Pole, that officer of hers,\'94 he began again, restraining himself;\
\'93and indeed he is not an officer at all now. He served in the customs in\
Siberia, somewhere on the Chinese frontier, some puny little beggar of a\
Pole, I expect. Lost his job, they say. He\'92s heard now that Grushenka\'92s\
saved a little money, so he\'92s turned up again\'97that\'92s the explanation of\
the mystery.\'94\
\
Again Alyosha seemed not to hear. Rakitin could not control himself.\
\
\'93Well, so you\'92ve saved the sinner?\'94 he laughed spitefully. \'93Have you\
turned the Magdalene into the true path? Driven out the seven devils, eh?\
So you see the miracles you were looking out for just now have come to\
pass!\'94\
\
\'93Hush, Rakitin,\'94 Alyosha answered with an aching heart.\
\
\'93So you despise me now for those twenty\uc0\u8208 five roubles? I\'92ve sold my friend,\
you think. But you are not Christ, you know, and I am not Judas.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, Rakitin, I assure you I\'92d forgotten about it,\'94 cried Alyosha, \'93you\
remind me of it yourself....\'94\
\
But this was the last straw for Rakitin.\
\
\'93Damnation take you all and each of you!\'94 he cried suddenly, \'93why the\
devil did I take you up? I don\'92t want to know you from this time forward.\
Go alone, there\'92s your road!\'94\
\
And he turned abruptly into another street, leaving Alyosha alone in the\
dark. Alyosha came out of the town and walked across the fields to the\
monastery.\
\
\
\
Chapter IV. Cana Of Galilee\
\
\
It was very late, according to the monastery ideas, when Alyosha returned\
to the hermitage; the door\uc0\u8208 keeper let him in by a special entrance. It had\
struck nine o\'92clock\'97the hour of rest and repose after a day of such\
agitation for all. Alyosha timidly opened the door and went into the\
elder\'92s cell where his coffin was now standing. There was no one in the\
cell but Father Pa\'efssy, reading the Gospel in solitude over the coffin,\
and the young novice Porfiry, who, exhausted by the previous night\'92s\
conversation and the disturbing incidents of the day, was sleeping the\
deep sound sleep of youth on the floor of the other room. Though Father\
Pa\'efssy heard Alyosha come in, he did not even look in his direction.\
Alyosha turned to the right from the door to the corner, fell on his knees\
and began to pray.\
\
His soul was overflowing but with mingled feelings; no single sensation\
stood out distinctly; on the contrary, one drove out another in a slow,\
continual rotation. But there was a sweetness in his heart and, strange to\
say, Alyosha was not surprised at it. Again he saw that coffin before him,\
the hidden dead figure so precious to him, but the weeping and poignant\
grief of the morning was no longer aching in his soul. As soon as he came\
in, he fell down before the coffin as before a holy shrine, but joy, joy\
was glowing in his mind and in his heart. The one window of the cell was\
open, the air was fresh and cool. \'93So the smell must have become stronger,\
if they opened the window,\'94 thought Alyosha. But even this thought of the\
smell of corruption, which had seemed to him so awful and humiliating a\
few hours before, no longer made him feel miserable or indignant. He began\
quietly praying, but he soon felt that he was praying almost mechanically.\
Fragments of thought floated through his soul, flashed like stars and went\
out again at once, to be succeeded by others. But yet there was reigning\
in his soul a sense of the wholeness of things\'97something steadfast and\
comforting\'97and he was aware of it himself. Sometimes he began praying\
ardently, he longed to pour out his thankfulness and love....\
\
But when he had begun to pray, he passed suddenly to something else, and\
sank into thought, forgetting both the prayer and what had interrupted it.\
He began listening to what Father Pa\'efssy was reading, but worn out with\
exhaustion he gradually began to doze.\
\
\'93_And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee;_\'94 read Father\
Pa\'efssy. \'93_And the mother of Jesus was there; And both Jesus was called,\
and his disciples, to the marriage._\'94\
\
\'93Marriage? What\'92s that?... A marriage!\'94 floated whirling through Alyosha\'92s\
mind. \'93There is happiness for her, too.... She has gone to the feast....\
No, she has not taken the knife.... That was only a tragic phrase.... Well\
... tragic phrases should be forgiven, they must be. Tragic phrases\
comfort the heart.... Without them, sorrow would be too heavy for men to\
bear. Rakitin has gone off to the back alley. As long as Rakitin broods\
over his wrongs, he will always go off to the back alley.... But the high\
road ... The road is wide and straight and bright as crystal, and the sun\
is at the end of it.... Ah!... What\'92s being read?\'94...\
\
\'93_And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, They have\
no wine_\'94 ... Alyosha heard.\
\
\'93Ah, yes, I was missing that, and I didn\'92t want to miss it, I love that\
passage: it\'92s Cana of Galilee, the first miracle.... Ah, that miracle! Ah,\
that sweet miracle! It was not men\'92s grief, but their joy Christ visited,\
He worked His first miracle to help men\'92s gladness.... \'91He who loves men\
loves their gladness, too\'92 ... He was always repeating that, it was one of\
his leading ideas.... \'91There\'92s no living without joy,\'92 Mitya says.... Yes,\
Mitya.... \'91Everything that is true and good is always full of\
forgiveness,\'92 he used to say that, too\'94 ...\
\
\'93_Jesus saith unto her, Woman, what has it to do with thee or me? Mine\
hour is not yet come._\
\
\'93_His mother saith unto the servants, Whatsoever he saith unto you, do\
it_\'94 ...\
\
\'93Do it.... Gladness, the gladness of some poor, very poor, people.... Of\
course they were poor, since they hadn\'92t wine enough even at a wedding....\
The historians write that, in those days, the people living about the Lake\
of Gennesaret were the poorest that can possibly be imagined ... and\
another great heart, that other great being, His Mother, knew that He had\
come not only to make His great terrible sacrifice. She knew that His\
heart was open even to the simple, artless merrymaking of some obscure and\
unlearned people, who had warmly bidden Him to their poor wedding. \'91Mine\
hour is not yet come,\'92 He said, with a soft smile (He must have smiled\
gently to her). And, indeed, was it to make wine abundant at poor weddings\
He had come down to earth? And yet He went and did as she asked Him....\
Ah, he is reading again\'94....\
\
\'93_Jesus saith unto them, Fill the waterpots with water. And they filled\
them up to the brim._\
\
\'93_And he saith unto them, Draw out now and bear unto the governor of the\
feast. And they bare it._\
\
\'93_When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine, and\
knew not whence it was; (but the servants which drew the water knew;) the\
governor of the feast called the bridegroom,_\
\
\'93_And saith unto him, Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine;\
and when men have well drunk, that which is worse; but thou hast kept the\
good wine until now._\'94\
\
\'93But what\'92s this, what\'92s this? Why is the room growing wider?... Ah, yes\
... It\'92s the marriage, the wedding ... yes, of course. Here are the\
guests, here are the young couple sitting, and the merry crowd and ...\
Where is the wise governor of the feast? But who is this? Who? Again the\
walls are receding.... Who is getting up there from the great table?\
What!... He here, too? But he\'92s in the coffin ... but he\'92s here, too. He\
has stood up, he sees me, he is coming here.... God!\'94...\
\
Yes, he came up to him, to him, he, the little, thin old man, with tiny\
wrinkles on his face, joyful and laughing softly. There was no coffin now,\
and he was in the same dress as he had worn yesterday sitting with them,\
when the visitors had gathered about him. His face was uncovered, his eyes\
were shining. How was this, then? He, too, had been called to the feast.\
He, too, at the marriage of Cana in Galilee....\
\
\'93Yes, my dear, I am called, too, called and bidden,\'94 he heard a soft voice\
saying over him. \'93Why have you hidden yourself here, out of sight? You\
come and join us too.\'94\
\
It was his voice, the voice of Father Zossima. And it must be he, since he\
called him!\
\
The elder raised Alyosha by the hand and he rose from his knees.\
\
\'93We are rejoicing,\'94 the little, thin old man went on. \'93We are drinking the\
new wine, the wine of new, great gladness; do you see how many guests?\
Here are the bride and bridegroom, here is the wise governor of the feast,\
he is tasting the new wine. Why do you wonder at me? I gave an onion to a\
beggar, so I, too, am here. And many here have given only an onion\
each\'97only one little onion.... What are all our deeds? And you, my gentle\
one, you, my kind boy, you too have known how to give a famished woman an\
onion to\uc0\u8208 day. Begin your work, dear one, begin it, gentle one!... Do you\
see our Sun, do you see Him?\'94\
\
\'93I am afraid ... I dare not look,\'94 whispered Alyosha.\
\
\'93Do not fear Him. He is terrible in His greatness, awful in His sublimity,\
but infinitely merciful. He has made Himself like unto us from love and\
rejoices with us. He is changing the water into wine that the gladness of\
the guests may not be cut short. He is expecting new guests, He is calling\
new ones unceasingly for ever and ever.... There they are bringing new\
wine. Do you see they are bringing the vessels....\'94\
\
Something glowed in Alyosha\'92s heart, something filled it till it ached,\
tears of rapture rose from his soul.... He stretched out his hands,\
uttered a cry and waked up.\
\
Again the coffin, the open window, and the soft, solemn, distinct reading\
of the Gospel. But Alyosha did not listen to the reading. It was strange,\
he had fallen asleep on his knees, but now he was on his feet, and\
suddenly, as though thrown forward, with three firm rapid steps he went\
right up to the coffin. His shoulder brushed against Father Pa\'efssy without\
his noticing it. Father Pa\'efssy raised his eyes for an instant from his\
book, but looked away again at once, seeing that something strange was\
happening to the boy. Alyosha gazed for half a minute at the coffin, at\
the covered, motionless dead man that lay in the coffin, with the ikon on\
his breast and the peaked cap with the octangular cross, on his head. He\
had only just been hearing his voice, and that voice was still ringing in\
his ears. He was listening, still expecting other words, but suddenly he\
turned sharply and went out of the cell.\
\
He did not stop on the steps either, but went quickly down; his soul,\
overflowing with rapture, yearned for freedom, space, openness. The vault\
of heaven, full of soft, shining stars, stretched vast and fathomless\
above him. The Milky Way ran in two pale streams from the zenith to the\
horizon. The fresh, motionless, still night enfolded the earth. The white\
towers and golden domes of the cathedral gleamed out against the sapphire\
sky. The gorgeous autumn flowers, in the beds round the house, were\
slumbering till morning. The silence of earth seemed to melt into the\
silence of the heavens. The mystery of earth was one with the mystery of\
the stars....\
\
Alyosha stood, gazed, and suddenly threw himself down on the earth. He did\
not know why he embraced it. He could not have told why he longed so\
irresistibly to kiss it, to kiss it all. But he kissed it weeping, sobbing\
and watering it with his tears, and vowed passionately to love it, to love\
it for ever and ever. \'93Water the earth with the tears of your joy and love\
those tears,\'94 echoed in his soul.\
\
What was he weeping over?\
\
Oh! in his rapture he was weeping even over those stars, which were\
shining to him from the abyss of space, and \'93he was not ashamed of that\
ecstasy.\'94 There seemed to be threads from all those innumerable worlds of\
God, linking his soul to them, and it was trembling all over \'93in contact\
with other worlds.\'94 He longed to forgive every one and for everything, and\
to beg forgiveness. Oh, not for himself, but for all men, for all and for\
everything. \'93And others are praying for me too,\'94 echoed again in his soul.\
But with every instant he felt clearly and, as it were, tangibly, that\
something firm and unshakable as that vault of heaven had entered into his\
soul. It was as though some idea had seized the sovereignty of his\
mind\'97and it was for all his life and for ever and ever. He had fallen on\
the earth a weak boy, but he rose up a resolute champion, and he knew and\
felt it suddenly at the very moment of his ecstasy. And never, never, all\
his life long, could Alyosha forget that minute.\
\
\'93Some one visited my soul in that hour,\'94 he used to say afterwards, with\
implicit faith in his words.\
\
Within three days he left the monastery in accordance with the words of\
his elder, who had bidden him \'93sojourn in the world.\'94\
\
\
\
\
Book VIII. Mitya\
\
\
\
Chapter I. Kuzma Samsonov\
\
\
But Dmitri, to whom Grushenka, flying away to a new life, had left her\
last greetings, bidding him remember the hour of her love for ever, knew\
nothing of what had happened to her, and was at that moment in a condition\
of feverish agitation and activity. For the last two days he had been in\
such an inconceivable state of mind that he might easily have fallen ill\
with brain fever, as he said himself afterwards. Alyosha had not been able\
to find him the morning before, and Ivan had not succeeded in meeting him\
at the tavern on the same day. The people at his lodgings, by his orders,\
concealed his movements.\
\
He had spent those two days literally rushing in all directions,\
\'93struggling with his destiny and trying to save himself,\'94 as he expressed\
it himself afterwards, and for some hours he even made a dash out of the\
town on urgent business, terrible as it was to him to lose sight of\
Grushenka for a moment. All this was explained afterwards in detail, and\
confirmed by documentary evidence; but for the present we will only note\
the most essential incidents of those two terrible days immediately\
preceding the awful catastrophe, that broke so suddenly upon him.\
\
Though Grushenka had, it is true, loved him for an hour, genuinely and\
sincerely, yet she tortured him sometimes cruelly and mercilessly. The\
worst of it was that he could never tell what she meant to do. To prevail\
upon her by force or kindness was also impossible: she would yield to\
nothing. She would only have become angry and turned away from him\
altogether, he knew that well already. He suspected, quite correctly, that\
she, too, was passing through an inward struggle, and was in a state of\
extraordinary indecision, that she was making up her mind to something,\
and unable to determine upon it. And so, not without good reason, he\
divined, with a sinking heart, that at moments she must simply hate him\
and his passion. And so, perhaps, it was, but what was distressing\
Grushenka he did not understand. For him the whole tormenting question lay\
between him and Fyodor Pavlovitch.\
\
Here, we must note, by the way, one certain fact: he was firmly persuaded\
that Fyodor Pavlovitch would offer, or perhaps had offered, Grushenka\
lawful wedlock, and did not for a moment believe that the old voluptuary\
hoped to gain his object for three thousand roubles. Mitya had reached\
this conclusion from his knowledge of Grushenka and her character. That\
was how it was that he could believe at times that all Grushenka\'92s\
uneasiness rose from not knowing which of them to choose, which was most\
to her advantage.\
\
Strange to say, during those days it never occurred to him to think of the\
approaching return of the \'93officer,\'94 that is, of the man who had been such\
a fatal influence in Grushenka\'92s life, and whose arrival she was expecting\
with such emotion and dread. It is true that of late Grushenka had been\
very silent about it. Yet he was perfectly aware of a letter she had\
received a month ago from her seducer, and had heard of it from her own\
lips. He partly knew, too, what the letter contained. In a moment of spite\
Grushenka had shown him that letter, but to her astonishment he attached\
hardly any consequence to it. It would be hard to say why this was.\
Perhaps, weighed down by all the hideous horror of his struggle with his\
own father for this woman, he was incapable of imagining any danger more\
terrible, at any rate for the time. He simply did not believe in a suitor\
who suddenly turned up again after five years\'92 disappearance, still less\
in his speedy arrival. Moreover, in the \'93officer\'92s\'94 first letter which had\
been shown to Mitya, the possibility of his new rival\'92s visit was very\
vaguely suggested. The letter was very indefinite, high\uc0\u8208 flown, and full of\
sentimentality. It must be noted that Grushenka had concealed from him the\
last lines of the letter, in which his return was alluded to more\
definitely. He had, besides, noticed at that moment, he remembered\
afterwards, a certain involuntary proud contempt for this missive from\
Siberia on Grushenka\'92s face. Grushenka told him nothing of what had passed\
later between her and this rival; so that by degrees he had completely\
forgotten the officer\'92s existence.\
\
He felt that whatever might come later, whatever turn things might take,\
his final conflict with Fyodor Pavlovitch was close upon him, and must be\
decided before anything else. With a sinking heart he was expecting every\
moment Grushenka\'92s decision, always believing that it would come suddenly,\
on the impulse of the moment. All of a sudden she would say to him: \'93Take\
me, I\'92m yours for ever,\'94 and it would all be over. He would seize her and\
bear her away at once to the ends of the earth. Oh, then he would bear her\
away at once, as far, far away as possible; to the farthest end of Russia,\
if not of the earth, then he would marry her, and settle down with her\
incognito, so that no one would know anything about them, there, here, or\
anywhere. Then, oh, then, a new life would begin at once!\
\
Of this different, reformed and \'93virtuous\'94 life (\'93it must, it must be\
virtuous\'94) he dreamed feverishly at every moment. He thirsted for that\
reformation and renewal. The filthy morass, in which he had sunk of his\
own free will, was too revolting to him, and, like very many men in such\
cases, he put faith above all in change of place. If only it were not for\
these people, if only it were not for these circumstances, if only he\
could fly away from this accursed place\'97he would be altogether\
regenerated, would enter on a new path. That was what he believed in, and\
what he was yearning for.\
\
But all this could only be on condition of the first, the _happy_ solution\
of the question. There was another possibility, a different and awful\
ending. Suddenly she might say to him: \'93Go away. I have just come to terms\
with Fyodor Pavlovitch. I am going to marry him and don\'92t want you\'94\'97and\
then ... but then.... But Mitya did not know what would happen then. Up to\
the last hour he didn\'92t know. That must be said to his credit. He had no\
definite intentions, had planned no crime. He was simply watching and\
spying in agony, while he prepared himself for the first, happy solution\
of his destiny. He drove away any other idea, in fact. But for that ending\
a quite different anxiety arose, a new, incidental, but yet fatal and\
insoluble difficulty presented itself.\
\
If she were to say to him: \'93I\'92m yours; take me away,\'94 how could he take\
her away? Where had he the means, the money to do it? It was just at this\
time that all sources of revenue from Fyodor Pavlovitch, doles which had\
gone on without interruption for so many years, ceased. Grushenka had\
money, of course, but with regard to this Mitya suddenly evinced\
extraordinary pride; he wanted to carry her away and begin the new life\
with her himself, at his own expense, not at hers. He could not conceive\
of taking her money, and the very idea caused him a pang of intense\
repulsion. I won\'92t enlarge on this fact or analyze it here, but confine\
myself to remarking that this was his attitude at the moment. All this may\
have arisen indirectly and unconsciously from the secret stings of his\
conscience for the money of Katerina Ivanovna that he had dishonestly\
appropriated. \'93I\'92ve been a scoundrel to one of them, and I shall be a\
scoundrel again to the other directly,\'94 was his feeling then, as he\
explained after: \'93and when Grushenka knows, she won\'92t care for such a\
scoundrel.\'94\
\
Where then was he to get the means, where was he to get the fateful money?\
Without it, all would be lost and nothing could be done, \'93and only because\
I hadn\'92t the money. Oh, the shame of it!\'94\
\
To anticipate things: he did, perhaps, know where to get the money, knew,\
perhaps, where it lay at that moment. I will say no more of this here, as\
it will all be clear later. But his chief trouble, I must explain however\
obscurely, lay in the fact that to have that sum he knew of, to _have the\
right_ to take it, he must first restore Katerina Ivanovna\'92s three\
thousand\'97if not, \'93I\'92m a common pickpocket, I\'92m a scoundrel, and I don\'92t\
want to begin a new life as a scoundrel,\'94 Mitya decided. And so he made up\
his mind to move heaven and earth to return Katerina Ivanovna that three\
thousand, and that _first of all_. The final stage of this decision, so to\
say, had been reached only during the last hours, that is, after his last\
interview with Alyosha, two days before, on the high\uc0\u8208 road, on the evening\
when Grushenka had insulted Katerina Ivanovna, and Mitya, after hearing\
Alyosha\'92s account of it, had admitted that he was a scoundrel, and told\
him to tell Katerina Ivanovna so, if it could be any comfort to her. After\
parting from his brother on that night, he had felt in his frenzy that it\
would be better \'93to murder and rob some one than fail to pay my debt to\
Katya. I\'92d rather every one thought me a robber and a murderer, I\'92d rather\
go to Siberia than that Katya should have the right to say that I deceived\
her and stole her money, and used her money to run away with Grushenka and\
begin a new life! That I can\'92t do!\'94 So Mitya decided, grinding his teeth,\
and he might well fancy at times that his brain would give way. But\
meanwhile he went on struggling....\
\
Strange to say, though one would have supposed there was nothing left for\
him but despair\'97for what chance had he, with nothing in the world, to\
raise such a sum?\'97yet to the very end he persisted in hoping that he would\
get that three thousand, that the money would somehow come to him of\
itself, as though it might drop from heaven. That is just how it is with\
people who, like Dmitri, have never had anything to do with money, except\
to squander what has come to them by inheritance without any effort of\
their own, and have no notion how money is obtained. A whirl of the most\
fantastic notions took possession of his brain immediately after he had\
parted with Alyosha two days before, and threw his thoughts into a tangle\
of confusion. This is how it was he pitched first on a perfectly wild\
enterprise. And perhaps to men of that kind in such circumstances the most\
impossible, fantastic schemes occur first, and seem most practical.\
\
He suddenly determined to go to Samsonov, the merchant who was Grushenka\'92s\
protector, and to propose a \'93scheme\'94 to him, and by means of it to obtain\
from him at once the whole of the sum required. Of the commercial value of\
his scheme he had no doubt, not the slightest, and was only uncertain how\
Samsonov would look upon his freak, supposing he were to consider it from\
any but the commercial point of view. Though Mitya knew the merchant by\
sight, he was not acquainted with him and had never spoken a word to him.\
But for some unknown reason he had long entertained the conviction that\
the old reprobate, who was lying at death\'92s door, would perhaps not at all\
object now to Grushenka\'92s securing a respectable position, and marrying a\
man \'93to be depended upon.\'94 And he believed not only that he would not\
object, but that this was what he desired, and, if opportunity arose, that\
he would be ready to help. From some rumor, or perhaps from some stray\
word of Grushenka\'92s, he had gathered further that the old man would\
perhaps prefer him to Fyodor Pavlovitch for Grushenka.\
\
Possibly many of the readers of my novel will feel that in reckoning on\
such assistance, and being ready to take his bride, so to speak, from the\
hands of her protector, Dmitri showed great coarseness and want of\
delicacy. I will only observe that Mitya looked upon Grushenka\'92s past as\
something completely over. He looked on that past with infinite pity and\
resolved with all the fervor of his passion that when once Grushenka told\
him she loved him and would marry him, it would mean the beginning of a\
new Grushenka and a new Dmitri, free from every vice. They would forgive\
one another and would begin their lives afresh. As for Kuzma Samsonov,\
Dmitri looked upon him as a man who had exercised a fateful influence in\
that remote past of Grushenka\'92s, though she had never loved him, and who\
was now himself a thing of the past, completely done with, and, so to say,\
non\uc0\u8208 existent. Besides, Mitya hardly looked upon him as a man at all, for\
it was known to every one in the town that he was only a shattered wreck,\
whose relations with Grushenka had changed their character and were now\
simply paternal, and that this had been so for a long time.\
\
In any case there was much simplicity on Mitya\'92s part in all this, for in\
spite of all his vices, he was a very simple\uc0\u8208 hearted man. It was an\
instance of this simplicity that Mitya was seriously persuaded that, being\
on the eve of his departure for the next world, old Kuzma must sincerely\
repent of his past relations with Grushenka, and that she had no more\
devoted friend and protector in the world than this, now harmless old man.\
\
After his conversation with Alyosha, at the cross\uc0\u8208 roads, he hardly slept\
all night, and at ten o\'92clock next morning, he was at the house of\
Samsonov and telling the servant to announce him. It was a very large and\
gloomy old house of two stories, with a lodge and outhouses. In the lower\
story lived Samsonov\'92s two married sons with their families, his old\
sister, and his unmarried daughter. In the lodge lived two of his clerks,\
one of whom also had a large family. Both the lodge and the lower story\
were overcrowded, but the old man kept the upper floor to himself, and\
would not even let the daughter live there with him, though she waited\
upon him, and in spite of her asthma was obliged at certain fixed hours,\
and at any time he might call her, to run upstairs to him from below.\
\
This upper floor contained a number of large rooms kept purely for show,\
furnished in the old\uc0\u8208 fashioned merchant style, with long monotonous rows\
of clumsy mahogany chairs along the walls, with glass chandeliers under\
shades, and gloomy mirrors on the walls. All these rooms were entirely\
empty and unused, for the old man kept to one room, a small, remote\
bedroom, where he was waited upon by an old servant with a kerchief on her\
head, and by a lad, who used to sit on the locker in the passage. Owing to\
his swollen legs, the old man could hardly walk at all, and was only\
rarely lifted from his leather arm\uc0\u8208 chair, when the old woman supporting\
him led him up and down the room once or twice. He was morose and taciturn\
even with this old woman.\
\
When he was informed of the arrival of the \'93captain,\'94 he at once refused\
to see him. But Mitya persisted and sent his name up again. Samsonov\
questioned the lad minutely: What he looked like? Whether he was drunk?\
Was he going to make a row? The answer he received was: that he was sober,\
but wouldn\'92t go away. The old man again refused to see him. Then Mitya,\
who had foreseen this, and purposely brought pencil and paper with him,\
wrote clearly on the piece of paper the words: \'93On most important business\
closely concerning Agrafena Alexandrovna,\'94 and sent it up to the old man.\
\
After thinking a little Samsonov told the lad to take the visitor to the\
drawing\uc0\u8208 room, and sent the old woman downstairs with a summons to his\
younger son to come upstairs to him at once. This younger son, a man over\
six foot and of exceptional physical strength, who was closely\uc0\u8208 shaven and\
dressed in the European style, though his father still wore a kaftan and a\
beard, came at once without a comment. All the family trembled before the\
father. The old man had sent for this giant, not because he was afraid of\
the \'93captain\'94 (he was by no means of a timorous temper), but in order to\
have a witness in case of any emergency. Supported by his son and the\
servant\uc0\u8208 lad, he waddled at last into the drawing\u8208 room. It may be assumed\
that he felt considerable curiosity. The drawing\uc0\u8208 room in which Mitya was\
awaiting him was a vast, dreary room that laid a weight of depression on\
the heart. It had a double row of windows, a gallery, marbled walls, and\
three immense chandeliers with glass lusters covered with shades.\
\
Mitya was sitting on a little chair at the entrance, awaiting his fate\
with nervous impatience. When the old man appeared at the opposite door,\
seventy feet away, Mitya jumped up at once, and with his long, military\
stride walked to meet him. Mitya was well dressed, in a frock\uc0\u8208 coat,\
buttoned up, with a round hat and black gloves in his hands, just as he\
had been three days before at the elder\'92s, at the family meeting with his\
father and brothers. The old man waited for him, standing dignified and\
unbending, and Mitya felt at once that he had looked him through and\
through as he advanced. Mitya was greatly impressed, too, with Samsonov\'92s\
immensely swollen face. His lower lip, which had always been thick, hung\
down now, looking like a bun. He bowed to his guest in dignified silence,\
motioned him to a low chair by the sofa, and, leaning on his son\'92s arm he\
began lowering himself on to the sofa opposite, groaning painfully, so\
that Mitya, seeing his painful exertions, immediately felt remorseful and\
sensitively conscious of his insignificance in the presence of the\
dignified person he had ventured to disturb.\
\
\'93What is it you want of me, sir?\'94 said the old man, deliberately,\
distinctly, severely, but courteously, when he was at last seated.\
\
Mitya started, leapt up, but sat down again. Then he began at once\
speaking with loud, nervous haste, gesticulating, and in a positive\
frenzy. He was unmistakably a man driven into a corner, on the brink of\
ruin, catching at the last straw, ready to sink if he failed. Old Samsonov\
probably grasped all this in an instant, though his face remained cold and\
immovable as a statue\'92s.\
\
\'93Most honored sir, Kuzma Kuzmitch, you have no doubt heard more than once\
of my disputes with my father, Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov, who robbed me\
of my inheritance from my mother ... seeing the whole town is gossiping\
about it ... for here every one\'92s gossiping of what they shouldn\'92t ... and\
besides, it might have reached you through Grushenka ... I beg your\
pardon, through Agrafena Alexandrovna ... Agrafena Alexandrovna, the lady\
for whom I have the highest respect and esteem ...\'94\
\
So Mitya began, and broke down at the first sentence. We will not\
reproduce his speech word for word, but will only summarize the gist of\
it. Three months ago, he said, he had of express intention (Mitya\
purposely used these words instead of \'93intentionally\'94) consulted a lawyer\
in the chief town of the province, \'93a distinguished lawyer, Kuzma\
Kuzmitch, Pavel Pavlovitch Korneplodov. You have perhaps heard of him? A\
man of vast intellect, the mind of a statesman ... he knows you, too ...\
spoke of you in the highest terms ...\'94 Mitya broke down again. But these\
breaks did not deter him. He leapt instantly over the gaps, and struggled\
on and on.\
\
This Korneplodov, after questioning him minutely, and inspecting the\
documents he was able to bring him (Mitya alluded somewhat vaguely to\
these documents, and slurred over the subject with special haste),\
reported that they certainly might take proceedings concerning the village\
of Tchermashnya, which ought, he said, to have come to him, Mitya, from\
his mother, and so checkmate the old villain, his father ... \'93because\
every door was not closed and justice might still find a loophole.\'94 In\
fact, he might reckon on an additional sum of six or even seven thousand\
roubles from Fyodor Pavlovitch, as Tchermashnya was worth, at least,\
twenty\uc0\u8208 five thousand, he might say twenty\u8208 eight thousand, in fact,\
\'93thirty, thirty, Kuzma Kuzmitch, and would you believe it, I didn\'92t get\
seventeen from that heartless man!\'94 So he, Mitya, had thrown the business\
up, for the time, knowing nothing about the law, but on coming here was\
struck dumb by a cross\uc0\u8208 claim made upon him (here Mitya went adrift again\
and again took a flying leap forward), \'93so will not you, excellent and\
honored Kuzma Kuzmitch, be willing to take up all my claims against that\
unnatural monster, and pay me a sum down of only three thousand?... You\
see, you cannot, in any case, lose over it. On my honor, my honor, I swear\
that. Quite the contrary, you may make six or seven thousand instead of\
three.\'94 Above all, he wanted this concluded that very day.\
\
\'93I\'92ll do the business with you at a notary\'92s, or whatever it is ... in\
fact, I\'92m ready to do anything.... I\'92ll hand over all the deeds ...\
whatever you want, sign anything ... and we could draw up the agreement at\
once ... and if it were possible, if it were only possible, that very\
morning.... You could pay me that three thousand, for there isn\'92t a\
capitalist in this town to compare with you, and so would save me from ...\
would save me, in fact ... for a good, I might say an honorable action....\
For I cherish the most honorable feelings for a certain person, whom you\
know well, and care for as a father. I would not have come, indeed, if it\
had not been as a father. And, indeed, it\'92s a struggle of three in this\
business, for it\'92s fate\'97that\'92s a fearful thing, Kuzma Kuzmitch! A tragedy,\
Kuzma Kuzmitch, a tragedy! And as you\'92ve dropped out long ago, it\'92s a tug\uc0\u8208 \
of\uc0\u8208 war between two. I\'92m expressing it awkwardly, perhaps, but I\'92m not a\
literary man. You see, I\'92m on the one side, and that monster on the other.\
So you must choose. It\'92s either I or the monster. It all lies in your\
hands\'97the fate of three lives, and the happiness of two.... Excuse me, I\'92m\
making a mess of it, but you understand ... I see from your venerable eyes\
that you understand ... and if you don\'92t understand, I\'92m done for ... so\
you see!\'94\
\
Mitya broke off his clumsy speech with that, \'93so you see!\'94 and jumping up\
from his seat, awaited the answer to his foolish proposal. At the last\
phrase he had suddenly become hopelessly aware that it had all fallen\
flat, above all, that he had been talking utter nonsense.\
\
\'93How strange it is! On the way here it seemed all right, and now it\'92s\
nothing but nonsense.\'94 The idea suddenly dawned on his despairing mind.\
All the while he had been talking, the old man sat motionless, watching\
him with an icy expression in his eyes. After keeping him for a moment in\
suspense, Kuzma Kuzmitch pronounced at last in the most positive and\
chilling tone:\
\
\'93Excuse me, we don\'92t undertake such business.\'94\
\
Mitya suddenly felt his legs growing weak under him.\
\
\'93What am I to do now, Kuzma Kuzmitch?\'94 he muttered, with a pale smile. \'93I\
suppose it\'92s all up with me\'97what do you think?\'94\
\
\'93Excuse me....\'94\
\
Mitya remained standing, staring motionless. He suddenly noticed a\
movement in the old man\'92s face. He started.\
\
\'93You see, sir, business of that sort\'92s not in our line,\'94 said the old man\
slowly. \'93There\'92s the court, and the lawyers\'97it\'92s a perfect misery. But if\
you like, there is a man here you might apply to.\'94\
\
\'93Good heavens! Who is it? You\'92re my salvation, Kuzma Kuzmitch,\'94 faltered\
Mitya.\
\
\'93He doesn\'92t live here, and he\'92s not here just now. He is a peasant, he\
does business in timber. His name is Lyagavy. He\'92s been haggling with\
Fyodor Pavlovitch for the last year, over your copse at Tchermashnya. They\
can\'92t agree on the price, maybe you\'92ve heard? Now he\'92s come back again and\
is staying with the priest at Ilyinskoe, about twelve versts from the\
Volovya station. He wrote to me, too, about the business of the copse,\
asking my advice. Fyodor Pavlovitch means to go and see him himself. So if\
you were to be beforehand with Fyodor Pavlovitch and to make Lyagavy the\
offer you\'92ve made me, he might possibly\'97\'94\
\
\'93A brilliant idea!\'94 Mitya interrupted ecstatically. \'93He\'92s the very man, it\
would just suit him. He\'92s haggling with him for it, being asked too much,\
and here he would have all the documents entitling him to the property\
itself. Ha ha ha!\'94\
\
And Mitya suddenly went off into his short, wooden laugh, startling\
Samsonov.\
\
\'93How can I thank you, Kuzma Kuzmitch?\'94 cried Mitya effusively.\
\
\'93Don\'92t mention it,\'94 said Samsonov, inclining his head.\
\
\'93But you don\'92t know, you\'92ve saved me. Oh, it was a true presentiment\
brought me to you.... So now to this priest!\'94\
\
\'93No need of thanks.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll make haste and fly there. I\'92m afraid I\'92ve overtaxed your strength. I\
shall never forget it. It\'92s a Russian says that, Kuzma Kuzmitch, a R\uc0\u8208 r\u8208 \
russian!\'94\
\
\'93To be sure!\'94\
\
Mitya seized his hand to press it, but there was a malignant gleam in the\
old man\'92s eye. Mitya drew back his hand, but at once blamed himself for\
his mistrustfulness.\
\
\'93It\'92s because he\'92s tired,\'94 he thought.\
\
\'93For her sake! For her sake, Kuzma Kuzmitch! You understand that it\'92s for\
her,\'94 he cried, his voice ringing through the room. He bowed, turned\
sharply round, and with the same long stride walked to the door without\
looking back. He was trembling with delight.\
\
\'93Everything was on the verge of ruin and my guardian angel saved me,\'94 was\
the thought in his mind. And if such a business man as Samsonov (a most\
worthy old man, and what dignity!) had suggested this course, then ...\
then success was assured. He would fly off immediately. \'93I will be back\
before night, I shall be back at night and the thing is done. Could the\
old man have been laughing at me?\'94 exclaimed Mitya, as he strode towards\
his lodging. He could, of course, imagine nothing, but that the advice was\
practical \'93from such a business man\'94 with an understanding of the\
business, with an understanding of this Lyagavy (curious surname!). Or\'97the\
old man was laughing at him.\
\
Alas! The second alternative was the correct one. Long afterwards, when\
the catastrophe had happened, old Samsonov himself confessed, laughing,\
that he had made a fool of the \'93captain.\'94 He was a cold, spiteful and\
sarcastic man, liable to violent antipathies. Whether it was the\
\'93captain\'92s\'94 excited face, or the foolish conviction of the \'93rake and\
spendthrift,\'94 that he, Samsonov, could be taken in by such a cock\uc0\u8208 and\u8208 bull\
story as his scheme, or his jealousy of Grushenka, in whose name this\
\'93scapegrace\'94 had rushed in on him with such a tale to get money which\
worked on the old man, I can\'92t tell. But at the instant when Mitya stood\
before him, feeling his legs grow weak under him, and frantically\
exclaiming that he was ruined, at that moment the old man looked at him\
with intense spite, and resolved to make a laughing\uc0\u8208 stock of him. When\
Mitya had gone, Kuzma Kuzmitch, white with rage, turned to his son and\
bade him see to it that that beggar be never seen again, and never\
admitted even into the yard, or else he\'92d\'97\
\
He did not utter his threat. But even his son, who often saw him enraged,\
trembled with fear. For a whole hour afterwards, the old man was shaking\
with anger, and by evening he was worse, and sent for the doctor.\
\
\
\
Chapter II. Lyagavy\
\
\
So he must drive at full speed, and he had not the money for horses. He\
had forty kopecks, and that was all, all that was left after so many years\
of prosperity! But he had at home an old silver watch which had long\
ceased to go. He snatched it up and carried it to a Jewish watchmaker who\
had a shop in the market\uc0\u8208 place. The Jew gave him six roubles for it.\
\
\'93And I didn\'92t expect that,\'94 cried Mitya, ecstatically. (He was still in a\
state of ecstasy.) He seized his six roubles and ran home. At home he\
borrowed three roubles from the people of the house, who loved him so much\
that they were pleased to give it him, though it was all they had. Mitya\
in his excitement told them on the spot that his fate would be decided\
that day, and he described, in desperate haste, the whole scheme he had\
put before Samsonov, the latter\'92s decision, his own hopes for the future,\
and so on. These people had been told many of their lodger\'92s secrets\
before, and so looked upon him as a gentleman who was not at all proud,\
and almost one of themselves. Having thus collected nine roubles Mitya\
sent for posting\uc0\u8208 horses to take him to the Volovya station. This was how\
the fact came to be remembered and established that \'93at midday, on the day\
before the event, Mitya had not a farthing, and that he had sold his watch\
to get money and had borrowed three roubles from his landlord, all in the\
presence of witnesses.\'94\
\
I note this fact, later on it will be apparent why I do so.\
\
Though he was radiant with the joyful anticipation that he would at last\
solve all his difficulties, yet, as he drew near Volovya station, he\
trembled at the thought of what Grushenka might be doing in his absence.\
What if she made up her mind to\uc0\u8208 day to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch? This was\
why he had gone off without telling her and why he left orders with his\
landlady not to let out where he had gone, if any one came to inquire for\
him.\
\
\'93I must, I must get back to\uc0\u8208 night,\'94 he repeated, as he was jolted along in\
the cart, \'93and I dare say I shall have to bring this Lyagavy back here ...\
to draw up the deed.\'94 So mused Mitya, with a throbbing heart, but alas!\
his dreams were not fated to be carried out.\
\
To begin with, he was late, taking a short cut from Volovya station which\
turned out to be eighteen versts instead of twelve. Secondly, he did not\
find the priest at home at Ilyinskoe; he had gone off to a neighboring\
village. While Mitya, setting off there with the same exhausted horses,\
was looking for him, it was almost dark.\
\
The priest, a shy and amiable looking little man, informed him at once\
that though Lyagavy had been staying with him at first, he was now at\
Suhoy Possyolok, that he was staying the night in the forester\'92s cottage,\
as he was buying timber there too. At Mitya\'92s urgent request that he would\
take him to Lyagavy at once, and by so doing \'93save him, so to speak,\'94 the\
priest agreed, after some demur, to conduct him to Suhoy Possyolok; his\
curiosity was obviously aroused. But, unluckily, he advised their going on\
foot, as it would not be \'93much over\'94 a verst. Mitya, of course, agreed,\
and marched off with his yard\uc0\u8208 long strides, so that the poor priest almost\
ran after him. He was a very cautious man, though not old.\
\
Mitya at once began talking to him, too, of his plans, nervously and\
excitedly asking advice in regard to Lyagavy, and talking all the way. The\
priest listened attentively, but gave little advice. He turned off Mitya\'92s\
questions with: \'93I don\'92t know. Ah, I can\'92t say. How can I tell?\'94 and so\
on. When Mitya began to speak of his quarrel with his father over his\
inheritance, the priest was positively alarmed, as he was in some way\
dependent on Fyodor Pavlovitch. He inquired, however, with surprise, why\
he called the peasant\uc0\u8208 trader Gorstkin, Lyagavy, and obligingly explained\
to Mitya that, though the man\'92s name really was Lyagavy, he was never\
called so, as he would be grievously offended at the name, and that he\
must be sure to call him Gorstkin, \'93or you\'92ll do nothing with him; he\
won\'92t even listen to you,\'94 said the priest in conclusion.\
\
Mitya was somewhat surprised for a moment, and explained that that was\
what Samsonov had called him. On hearing this fact, the priest dropped the\
subject, though he would have done well to put into words his doubt\
whether, if Samsonov had sent him to that peasant, calling him Lyagavy,\
there was not something wrong about it and he was turning him into\
ridicule. But Mitya had no time to pause over such trifles. He hurried,\
striding along, and only when he reached Suhoy Possyolok did he realize\
that they had come not one verst, nor one and a half, but at least three.\
This annoyed him, but he controlled himself.\
\
They went into the hut. The forester lived in one half of the hut, and\
Gorstkin was lodging in the other, the better room the other side of the\
passage. They went into that room and lighted a tallow candle. The hut was\
extremely overheated. On the table there was a samovar that had gone out,\
a tray with cups, an empty rum bottle, a bottle of vodka partly full, and\
some half\uc0\u8208 eaten crusts of wheaten bread. The visitor himself lay stretched\
at full length on the bench, with his coat crushed up under his head for a\
pillow, snoring heavily. Mitya stood in perplexity.\
\
\'93Of course I must wake him. My business is too important. I\'92ve come in\
such haste. I\'92m in a hurry to get back to\uc0\u8208 day,\'94 he said in great\
agitation. But the priest and the forester stood in silence, not giving\
their opinion. Mitya went up and began trying to wake him himself; he\
tried vigorously, but the sleeper did not wake.\
\
\'93He\'92s drunk,\'94 Mitya decided. \'93Good Lord! What am I to do? What am I to\
do?\'94 And, terribly impatient, he began pulling him by the arms, by the\
legs, shaking his head, lifting him up and making him sit on the bench.\
Yet, after prolonged exertions, he could only succeed in getting the\
drunken man to utter absurd grunts, and violent, but inarticulate oaths.\
\
\'93No, you\'92d better wait a little,\'94 the priest pronounced at last, \'93for he\'92s\
obviously not in a fit state.\'94\
\
\'93He\'92s been drinking the whole day,\'94 the forester chimed in.\
\
\'93Good heavens!\'94 cried Mitya. \'93If only you knew how important it is to me\
and how desperate I am!\'94\
\
\'93No, you\'92d better wait till morning,\'94 the priest repeated.\
\
\'93Till morning? Mercy! that\'92s impossible!\'94\
\
And in his despair he was on the point of attacking the sleeping man\
again, but stopped short at once, realizing the uselessness of his\
efforts. The priest said nothing, the sleepy forester looked gloomy.\
\
\'93What terrible tragedies real life contrives for people,\'94 said Mitya, in\
complete despair. The perspiration was streaming down his face. The priest\
seized the moment to put before him, very reasonably, that, even if he\
succeeded in wakening the man, he would still be drunk and incapable of\
conversation. \'93And your business is important,\'94 he said, \'93so you\'92d\
certainly better put it off till morning.\'94 With a gesture of despair Mitya\
agreed.\
\
\'93Father, I will stay here with a light, and seize the favorable moment. As\
soon as he wakes I\'92ll begin. I\'92ll pay you for the light,\'94 he said to the\
forester, \'93for the night\'92s lodging, too; you\'92ll remember Dmitri Karamazov.\
Only, Father, I don\'92t know what we\'92re to do with you. Where will you\
sleep?\'94\
\
\'93No, I\'92m going home. I\'92ll take his horse and get home,\'94 he said,\
indicating the forester. \'93And now I\'92ll say good\uc0\u8208 by. I wish you all\
success.\'94\
\
So it was settled. The priest rode off on the forester\'92s horse, delighted\
to escape, though he shook his head uneasily, wondering whether he ought\
not next day to inform his benefactor Fyodor Pavlovitch of this curious\
incident, \'93or he may in an unlucky hour hear of it, be angry, and withdraw\
his favor.\'94\
\
The forester, scratching himself, went back to his room without a word,\
and Mitya sat on the bench to \'93catch the favorable moment,\'94 as he\
expressed it. Profound dejection clung about his soul like a heavy mist. A\
profound, intense dejection! He sat thinking, but could reach no\
conclusion. The candle burnt dimly, a cricket chirped; it became\
insufferably close in the overheated room. He suddenly pictured the\
garden, the path behind the garden, the door of his father\'92s house\
mysteriously opening and Grushenka running in. He leapt up from the bench.\
\
\'93It\'92s a tragedy!\'94 he said, grinding his teeth. Mechanically he went up to\
the sleeping man and looked in his face. He was a lean, middle\uc0\u8208 aged\
peasant, with a very long face, flaxen curls, and a long, thin, reddish\
beard, wearing a blue cotton shirt and a black waistcoat, from the pocket\
of which peeped the chain of a silver watch. Mitya looked at his face with\
intense hatred, and for some unknown reason his curly hair particularly\
irritated him.\
\
What was insufferably humiliating was, that after leaving things of such\
importance and making such sacrifices, he, Mitya, utterly worn out, should\
with business of such urgency be standing over this dolt on whom his whole\
fate depended, while he snored as though there were nothing the matter, as\
though he\'92d dropped from another planet.\
\
\'93Oh, the irony of fate!\'94 cried Mitya, and, quite losing his head, he fell\
again to rousing the tipsy peasant. He roused him with a sort of ferocity,\
pulled at him, pushed him, even beat him; but after five minutes of vain\
exertions, he returned to his bench in helpless despair, and sat down.\
\
\'93Stupid! Stupid!\'94 cried Mitya. \'93And how dishonorable it all is!\'94 something\
made him add. His head began to ache horribly. \'93Should he fling it up and\
go away altogether?\'94 he wondered. \'93No, wait till to\uc0\u8208 morrow now. I\'92ll stay\
on purpose. What else did I come for? Besides, I\'92ve no means of going. How\
am I to get away from here now? Oh, the idiocy of it!\'94\
\
But his head ached more and more. He sat without moving, and unconsciously\
dozed off and fell asleep as he sat. He seemed to have slept for two hours\
or more. He was waked up by his head aching so unbearably that he could\
have screamed. There was a hammering in his temples, and the top of his\
head ached. It was a long time before he could wake up fully and\
understand what had happened to him.\
\
At last he realized that the room was full of charcoal fumes from the\
stove, and that he might die of suffocation. And the drunken peasant still\
lay snoring. The candle guttered and was about to go out. Mitya cried out,\
and ran staggering across the passage into the forester\'92s room. The\
forester waked up at once, but hearing that the other room was full of\
fumes, to Mitya\'92s surprise and annoyance, accepted the fact with strange\
unconcern, though he did go to see to it.\
\
\'93But he\'92s dead, he\'92s dead! and ... what am I to do then?\'94 cried Mitya\
frantically.\
\
They threw open the doors, opened a window and the chimney. Mitya brought\
a pail of water from the passage. First he wetted his own head, then,\
finding a rag of some sort, dipped it into the water, and put it on\
Lyagavy\'92s head. The forester still treated the matter contemptuously, and\
when he opened the window said grumpily:\
\
\'93It\'92ll be all right, now.\'94\
\
He went back to sleep, leaving Mitya a lighted lantern. Mitya fussed about\
the drunken peasant for half an hour, wetting his head, and gravely\
resolved not to sleep all night. But he was so worn out that when he sat\
down for a moment to take breath, he closed his eyes, unconsciously\
stretched himself full length on the bench and slept like the dead.\
\
It was dreadfully late when he waked. It was somewhere about nine o\'92clock.\
The sun was shining brightly in the two little windows of the hut. The\
curly\uc0\u8208 headed peasant was sitting on the bench and had his coat on. He had\
another samovar and another bottle in front of him. Yesterday\'92s bottle had\
already been finished, and the new one was more than half empty. Mitya\
jumped up and saw at once that the cursed peasant was drunk again,\
hopelessly and incurably. He stared at him for a moment with wide opened\
eyes. The peasant was silently and slyly watching him, with insulting\
composure, and even a sort of contemptuous condescension, so Mitya\
fancied. He rushed up to him.\
\
\'93Excuse me, you see ... I ... you\'92ve most likely heard from the forester\
here in the hut. I\'92m Lieutenant Dmitri Karamazov, the son of the old\
Karamazov whose copse you are buying.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s a lie!\'94 said the peasant, calmly and confidently.\
\
\'93A lie? You know Fyodor Pavlovitch?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know any of your Fyodor Pavlovitches,\'94 said the peasant, speaking\
thickly.\
\
\'93You\'92re bargaining with him for the copse, for the copse. Do wake up, and\
collect yourself. Father Pavel of Ilyinskoe brought me here. You wrote to\
Samsonov, and he has sent me to you,\'94 Mitya gasped breathlessly.\
\
\'93You\'92re l\uc0\u8208 lying!\'94 Lyagavy blurted out again. Mitya\'92s legs went cold.\
\
\'93For mercy\'92s sake! It isn\'92t a joke! You\'92re drunk, perhaps. Yet you can\
speak and understand ... or else ... I understand nothing!\'94\
\
\'93You\'92re a painter!\'94\
\
\'93For mercy\'92s sake! I\'92m Karamazov, Dmitri Karamazov. I have an offer to\
make you, an advantageous offer ... very advantageous offer, concerning\
the copse!\'94\
\
The peasant stroked his beard importantly.\
\
\'93No, you\'92ve contracted for the job and turned out a scamp. You\'92re a\
scoundrel!\'94\
\
\'93I assure you you\'92re mistaken,\'94 cried Mitya, wringing his hands in\
despair. The peasant still stroked his beard, and suddenly screwed up his\
eyes cunningly.\
\
\'93No, you show me this: you tell me the law that allows roguery. D\'92you\
hear? You\'92re a scoundrel! Do you understand that?\'94\
\
Mitya stepped back gloomily, and suddenly \'93something seemed to hit him on\
the head,\'94 as he said afterwards. In an instant a light seemed to dawn in\
his mind, \'93a light was kindled and I grasped it all.\'94 He stood, stupefied,\
wondering how he, after all a man of intelligence, could have yielded to\
such folly, have been led into such an adventure, and have kept it up for\
almost twenty\uc0\u8208 four hours, fussing round this Lyagavy, wetting his head.\
\
\'93Why, the man\'92s drunk, dead drunk, and he\'92ll go on drinking now for a\
week; what\'92s the use of waiting here? And what if Samsonov sent me here on\
purpose? What if she\'97? Oh, God, what have I done?\'94\
\
The peasant sat watching him and grinning. Another time Mitya might have\
killed the fool in a fury, but now he felt as weak as a child. He went\
quietly to the bench, took up his overcoat, put it on without a word, and\
went out of the hut. He did not find the forester in the next room; there\
was no one there. He took fifty kopecks in small change out of his pocket\
and put them on the table for his night\'92s lodging, the candle, and the\
trouble he had given. Coming out of the hut he saw nothing but forest all\
round. He walked at hazard, not knowing which way to turn out of the hut,\
to the right or to the left. Hurrying there the evening before with the\
priest, he had not noticed the road. He had no revengeful feeling for\
anybody, even for Samsonov, in his heart. He strode along a narrow forest\
path, aimless, dazed, without heeding where he was going. A child could\
have knocked him down, so weak was he in body and soul. He got out of the\
forest somehow, however, and a vista of fields, bare after the harvest,\
stretched as far as the eye could see.\
\
\'93What despair! What death all round!\'94 he repeated, striding on and on.\
\
He was saved by meeting an old merchant who was being driven across\
country in a hired trap. When he overtook him, Mitya asked the way, and it\
turned out that the old merchant, too, was going to Volovya. After some\
discussion Mitya got into the trap. Three hours later they arrived. At\
Volovya, Mitya at once ordered posting\uc0\u8208 horses to drive to the town, and\
suddenly realized that he was appallingly hungry. While the horses were\
being harnessed, an omelette was prepared for him. He ate it all in an\
instant, ate a huge hunk of bread, ate a sausage, and swallowed three\
glasses of vodka. After eating, his spirits and his heart grew lighter. He\
flew towards the town, urged on the driver, and suddenly made a new and\
\'93unalterable\'94 plan to procure that \'93accursed money\'94 before evening. \'93And\
to think, only to think that a man\'92s life should be ruined for the sake of\
that paltry three thousand!\'94 he cried, contemptuously. \'93I\'92ll settle it to\uc0\u8208 \
day.\'94 And if it had not been for the thought of Grushenka and of what\
might have happened to her, which never left him, he would perhaps have\
become quite cheerful again.... But the thought of her was stabbing him to\
the heart every moment, like a sharp knife.\
\
At last they arrived, and Mitya at once ran to Grushenka.\
\
\
\
Chapter III. Gold\uc0\u8208 Mines\
\
\
This was the visit of Mitya of which Grushenka had spoken to Rakitin with\
such horror. She was just then expecting the \'93message,\'94 and was much\
relieved that Mitya had not been to see her that day or the day before.\
She hoped that \'93please God he won\'92t come till I\'92m gone away,\'94 and he\
suddenly burst in on her. The rest we know already. To get him off her\
hands she suggested at once that he should walk with her to Samsonov\'92s,\
where she said she absolutely must go \'93to settle his accounts,\'94 and when\
Mitya accompanied her at once, she said good\uc0\u8208 by to him at the gate, making\
him promise to come at twelve o\'92clock to take her home again. Mitya, too,\
was delighted at this arrangement. If she was sitting at Samsonov\'92s she\
could not be going to Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s, \'93if only she\'92s not lying,\'94 he\
added at once. But he thought she was not lying from what he saw.\
\
He was that sort of jealous man who, in the absence of the beloved woman,\
at once invents all sorts of awful fancies of what may be happening to\
her, and how she may be betraying him, but, when shaken, heartbroken,\
convinced of her faithlessness, he runs back to her; at the first glance\
at her face, her gay, laughing, affectionate face, he revives at once,\
lays aside all suspicion and with joyful shame abuses himself for his\
jealousy.\
\
After leaving Grushenka at the gate he rushed home. Oh, he had so much\
still to do that day! But a load had been lifted from his heart, anyway.\
\
\'93Now I must only make haste and find out from Smerdyakov whether anything\
happened there last night, whether, by any chance, she went to Fyodor\
Pavlovitch; ough!\'94 floated through his mind.\
\
Before he had time to reach his lodging, jealousy had surged up again in\
his restless heart.\
\
Jealousy! \'93Othello was not jealous, he was trustful,\'94 observed Pushkin.\
And that remark alone is enough to show the deep insight of our great\
poet. Othello\'92s soul was shattered and his whole outlook clouded simply\
because _his ideal was destroyed_. But Othello did not begin hiding,\
spying, peeping. He was trustful, on the contrary. He had to be led up,\
pushed on, excited with great difficulty before he could entertain the\
idea of deceit. The truly jealous man is not like that. It is impossible\
to picture to oneself the shame and moral degradation to which the jealous\
man can descend without a qualm of conscience. And yet it\'92s not as though\
the jealous were all vulgar and base souls. On the contrary, a man of\
lofty feelings, whose love is pure and full of self\uc0\u8208 sacrifice, may yet\
hide under tables, bribe the vilest people, and be familiar with the\
lowest ignominy of spying and eavesdropping.\
\
Othello was incapable of making up his mind to faithlessness\'97not incapable\
of forgiving it, but of making up his mind to it\'97though his soul was as\
innocent and free from malice as a babe\'92s. It is not so with the really\
jealous man. It is hard to imagine what some jealous men can make up their\
mind to and overlook, and what they can forgive! The jealous are the\
readiest of all to forgive, and all women know it. The jealous man can\
forgive extraordinarily quickly (though, of course, after a violent\
scene), and he is able to forgive infidelity almost conclusively proved,\
the very kisses and embraces he has seen, if only he can somehow be\
convinced that it has all been \'93for the last time,\'94 and that his rival\
will vanish from that day forward, will depart to the ends of the earth,\
or that he himself will carry her away somewhere, where that dreaded rival\
will not get near her. Of course the reconciliation is only for an hour.\
For, even if the rival did disappear next day, he would invent another one\
and would be jealous of him. And one might wonder what there was in a love\
that had to be so watched over, what a love could be worth that needed\
such strenuous guarding. But that the jealous will never understand. And\
yet among them are men of noble hearts. It is remarkable, too, that those\
very men of noble hearts, standing hidden in some cupboard, listening and\
spying, never feel the stings of conscience at that moment, anyway, though\
they understand clearly enough with their \'93noble hearts\'94 the shameful\
depths to which they have voluntarily sunk.\
\
At the sight of Grushenka, Mitya\'92s jealousy vanished, and, for an instant\
he became trustful and generous, and positively despised himself for his\
evil feelings. But it only proved that, in his love for the woman, there\
was an element of something far higher than he himself imagined, that it\
was not only a sensual passion, not only the \'93curve of her body,\'94 of which\
he had talked to Alyosha. But, as soon as Grushenka had gone, Mitya began\
to suspect her of all the low cunning of faithlessness, and he felt no\
sting of conscience at it.\
\
And so jealousy surged up in him again. He had, in any case, to make\
haste. The first thing to be done was to get hold of at least a small,\
temporary loan of money. The nine roubles had almost all gone on his\
expedition. And, as we all know, one can\'92t take a step without money. But\
he had thought over in the cart where he could get a loan. He had a brace\
of fine dueling pistols in a case, which he had not pawned till then\
because he prized them above all his possessions.\
\
In the \'93Metropolis\'94 tavern he had some time since made acquaintance with a\
young official and had learnt that this very opulent bachelor was\
passionately fond of weapons. He used to buy pistols, revolvers, daggers,\
hang them on his wall and show them to acquaintances. He prided himself on\
them, and was quite a specialist on the mechanism of the revolver. Mitya,\
without stopping to think, went straight to him, and offered to pawn his\
pistols to him for ten roubles. The official, delighted, began trying to\
persuade him to sell them outright. But Mitya would not consent, so the\
young man gave him ten roubles, protesting that nothing would induce him\
to take interest. They parted friends.\
\
Mitya was in haste; he rushed towards Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s by the back way,\
to his arbor, to get hold of Smerdyakov as soon as possible. In this way\
the fact was established that three or four hours before a certain event,\
of which I shall speak later on, Mitya had not a farthing, and pawned for\
ten roubles a possession he valued, though, three hours later, he was in\
possession of thousands.... But I am anticipating. From Marya Kondratyevna\
(the woman living near Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s) he learned the very disturbing\
fact of Smerdyakov\'92s illness. He heard the story of his fall in the\
cellar, his fit, the doctor\'92s visit, Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s anxiety; he heard\
with interest, too, that his brother Ivan had set off that morning for\
Moscow.\
\
\'93Then he must have driven through Volovya before me,\'94 thought Dmitri, but\
he was terribly distressed about Smerdyakov. \'93What will happen now? Who\'92ll\
keep watch for me? Who\'92ll bring me word?\'94 he thought. He began greedily\
questioning the women whether they had seen anything the evening before.\
They quite understood what he was trying to find out, and completely\
reassured him. No one had been there. Ivan Fyodorovitch had been there the\
night; everything had been perfectly as usual. Mitya grew thoughtful. He\
would certainly have to keep watch to\uc0\u8208 day, but where? Here or at\
Samsonov\'92s gate? He decided that he must be on the look out both here and\
there, and meanwhile ... meanwhile.... The difficulty was that he had to\
carry out the new plan that he had made on the journey back. He was sure\
of its success, but he must not delay acting upon it. Mitya resolved to\
sacrifice an hour to it: \'93In an hour I shall know everything, I shall\
settle everything, and then, then, first of all to Samsonov\'92s. I\'92ll\
inquire whether Grushenka\'92s there and instantly be back here again, stay\
till eleven, and then to Samsonov\'92s again to bring her home.\'94 This was\
what he decided.\
\
He flew home, washed, combed his hair, brushed his clothes, dressed, and\
went to Madame Hohlakov\'92s. Alas! he had built his hopes on her. He had\
resolved to borrow three thousand from that lady. And what was more, he\
felt suddenly convinced that she would not refuse to lend it to him. It\
may be wondered why, if he felt so certain, he had not gone to her at\
first, one of his own sort, so to speak, instead of to Samsonov, a man he\
did not know, who was not of his own class, and to whom he hardly knew how\
to speak.\
\
But the fact was that he had never known Madame Hohlakov well, and had\
seen nothing of her for the last month, and that he knew she could not\
endure him. She had detested him from the first because he was engaged to\
Katerina Ivanovna, while she had, for some reason, suddenly conceived the\
desire that Katerina Ivanovna should throw him over, and marry the\
\'93charming, chivalrously refined Ivan, who had such excellent manners.\'94\
Mitya\'92s manners she detested. Mitya positively laughed at her, and had\
once said about her that she was just as lively and at her ease as she was\
uncultivated. But that morning in the cart a brilliant idea had struck\
him: \'93If she is so anxious I should not marry Katerina Ivanovna\'94 (and he\
knew she was positively hysterical upon the subject) \'93why should she\
refuse me now that three thousand, just to enable me to leave Katya and\
get away from her for ever. These spoilt fine ladies, if they set their\
hearts on anything, will spare no expense to satisfy their caprice.\
Besides, she\'92s so rich,\'94 Mitya argued.\
\
As for his \'93plan\'94 it was just the same as before; it consisted of the\
offer of his rights to Tchermashnya\'97but not with a commercial object, as\
it had been with Samsonov, not trying to allure the lady with the\
possibility of making a profit of six or seven thousand\'97but simply as a\
security for the debt. As he worked out this new idea, Mitya was enchanted\
with it, but so it always was with him in all his undertakings, in all his\
sudden decisions. He gave himself up to every new idea with passionate\
enthusiasm. Yet, when he mounted the steps of Madame Hohlakov\'92s house he\
felt a shiver of fear run down his spine. At that moment he saw fully, as\
a mathematical certainty, that this was his last hope, that if this broke\
down, nothing else was left him in the world, but to \'93rob and murder some\
one for the three thousand.\'94 It was half\uc0\u8208 past seven when he rang at the\
bell.\
\
At first fortune seemed to smile upon him. As soon as he was announced he\
was received with extraordinary rapidity. \'93As though she were waiting for\
me,\'94 thought Mitya, and as soon as he had been led to the drawing\uc0\u8208 room,\
the lady of the house herself ran in, and declared at once that she was\
expecting him.\
\
\'93I was expecting you! I was expecting you! Though I\'92d no reason to suppose\
you would come to see me, as you will admit yourself. Yet, I did expect\
you. You may marvel at my instinct, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, but I was\
convinced all the morning that you would come.\'94\
\
\'93That is certainly wonderful, madam,\'94 observed Mitya, sitting down limply,\
\'93but I have come to you on a matter of great importance.... On a matter of\
supreme importance for me, that is, madam ... for me alone ... and I\
hasten\'97\'94\
\
\'93I know you\'92ve come on most important business, Dmitri Fyodorovitch; it\'92s\
not a case of presentiment, no reactionary harking back to the miraculous\
(have you heard about Father Zossima?). This is a case of mathematics: you\
couldn\'92t help coming, after all that has passed with Katerina Ivanovna;\
you couldn\'92t, you couldn\'92t, that\'92s a mathematical certainty.\'94\
\
\'93The realism of actual life, madam, that\'92s what it is. But allow me to\
explain\'97\'94\
\
\'93Realism indeed, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. I\'92m all for realism now. I\'92ve seen\
too much of miracles. You\'92ve heard that Father Zossima is dead?\'94\
\
\'93No, madam, it\'92s the first time I\'92ve heard of it.\'94 Mitya was a little\
surprised. The image of Alyosha rose to his mind.\
\
\'93Last night, and only imagine\'97\'94\
\
\'93Madam,\'94 said Mitya, \'93I can imagine nothing except that I\'92m in a desperate\
position, and that if you don\'92t help me, everything will come to grief,\
and I first of all. Excuse me for the triviality of the expression, but\
I\'92m in a fever\'97\'94\
\
\'93I know, I know that you\'92re in a fever. You could hardly fail to be, and\
whatever you may say to me, I know beforehand. I have long been thinking\
over your destiny, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, I am watching over it and studying\
it.... Oh, believe me, I\'92m an experienced doctor of the soul, Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch.\'94\
\
\'93Madam, if you are an experienced doctor, I\'92m certainly an experienced\
patient,\'94 said Mitya, with an effort to be polite, \'93and I feel that if you\
are watching over my destiny in this way, you will come to my help in my\
ruin, and so allow me, at least to explain to you the plan with which I\
have ventured to come to you ... and what I am hoping of you.... I have\
come, madam\'97\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t explain it. It\'92s of secondary importance. But as for help, you\'92re\
not the first I have helped, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. You have most likely\
heard of my cousin, Madame Belmesov. Her husband was ruined, \'91had come to\
grief,\'92 as you characteristically express it, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. I\
recommended him to take to horse\uc0\u8208 breeding, and now he\'92s doing well. Have\
you any idea of horse\uc0\u8208 breeding, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?\'94\
\
\'93Not the faintest, madam; ah, madam, not the faintest!\'94 cried Mitya, in\
nervous impatience, positively starting from his seat. \'93I simply implore\
you, madam, to listen to me. Only give me two minutes of free speech that\
I may just explain to you everything, the whole plan with which I have\
come. Besides, I am short of time. I\'92m in a fearful hurry,\'94 Mitya cried\
hysterically, feeling that she was just going to begin talking again, and\
hoping to cut her short. \'93I have come in despair ... in the last gasp of\
despair, to beg you to lend me the sum of three thousand, a loan, but on\
safe, most safe security, madam, with the most trustworthy guarantees!\
Only let me explain\'97\'94\
\
\'93You must tell me all that afterwards, afterwards!\'94 Madame Hohlakov with a\
gesture demanded silence in her turn, \'93and whatever you may tell me, I\
know it all beforehand; I\'92ve told you so already. You ask for a certain\
sum, for three thousand, but I can give you more, immeasurably more, I\
will save you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, but you must listen to me.\'94\
\
Mitya started from his seat again.\
\
\'93Madam, will you really be so good!\'94 he cried, with strong feeling. \'93Good\
God, you\'92ve saved me! You have saved a man from a violent death, from a\
bullet.... My eternal gratitude\'97\'94\
\
\'93I will give you more, infinitely more than three thousand!\'94 cried Madame\
Hohlakov, looking with a radiant smile at Mitya\'92s ecstasy.\
\
\'93Infinitely? But I don\'92t need so much. I only need that fatal three\
thousand, and on my part I can give security for that sum with infinite\
gratitude, and I propose a plan which\'97\'94\
\
\'93Enough, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, it\'92s said and done.\'94 Madame Hohlakov cut him\
short, with the modest triumph of beneficence: \'93I have promised to save\
you, and I will save you. I will save you as I did Belmesov. What do you\
think of the gold\uc0\u8208 mines, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?\'94\
\
\'93Of the gold\uc0\u8208 mines, madam? I have never thought anything about them.\'94\
\
\'93But I have thought of them for you. Thought of them over and over again.\
I have been watching you for the last month. I\'92ve watched you a hundred\
times as you\'92ve walked past, saying to myself: That\'92s a man of energy who\
ought to be at the gold\uc0\u8208 mines. I\'92ve studied your gait and come to the\
conclusion: that\'92s a man who would find gold.\'94\
\
\'93From my gait, madam?\'94 said Mitya, smiling.\
\
\'93Yes, from your gait. You surely don\'92t deny that character can be told\
from the gait, Dmitri Fyodorovitch? Science supports the idea. I\'92m all for\
science and realism now. After all this business with Father Zossima,\
which has so upset me, from this very day I\'92m a realist and I want to\
devote myself to practical usefulness. I\'92m cured. \'91Enough!\'92 as Turgenev\
says.\'94\
\
\'93But, madam, the three thousand you so generously promised to lend me\'97\'94\
\
\'93It is yours, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94 Madame Hohlakov cut in at once. \'93The\
money is as good as in your pocket, not three thousand, but three million,\
Dmitri Fyodorovitch, in less than no time. I\'92ll make you a present of the\
idea: you shall find gold\uc0\u8208 mines, make millions, return and become a\
leading man, and wake us up and lead us to better things. Are we to leave\
it all to the Jews? You will found institutions and enterprises of all\
sorts. You will help the poor, and they will bless you. This is the age of\
railways, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. You\'92ll become famous and indispensable to\
the Department of Finance, which is so badly off at present. The\
depreciation of the rouble keeps me awake at night, Dmitri Fyodorovitch;\
people don\'92t know that side of me\'97\'94\
\
\'93Madam, madam!\'94 Dmitri interrupted with an uneasy presentiment. \'93I shall\
indeed, perhaps, follow your advice, your wise advice, madam.... I shall\
perhaps set off ... to the gold\uc0\u8208 mines.... I\'92ll come and see you again\
about it ... many times, indeed ... but now, that three thousand you so\
generously ... oh, that would set me free, and if you could to\uc0\u8208 day ... you\
see, I haven\'92t a minute, a minute to lose to\uc0\u8208 day\'97\'94\
\
\'93Enough, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, enough!\'94 Madame Hohlakov interrupted\
emphatically. \'93The question is, will you go to the gold\uc0\u8208 mines or not; have\
you quite made up your mind? Answer yes or no.\'94\
\
\'93I will go, madam, afterwards.... I\'92ll go where you like ... but now\'97\'94\
\
\'93Wait!\'94 cried Madame Hohlakov. And jumping up and running to a handsome\
bureau with numerous little drawers, she began pulling out one drawer\
after another, looking for something with desperate haste.\
\
\'93The three thousand,\'94 thought Mitya, his heart almost stopping, \'93and at\
the instant ... without any papers or formalities ... that\'92s doing things\
in gentlemanly style! She\'92s a splendid woman, if only she didn\'92t talk so\
much!\'94\
\
\'93Here!\'94 cried Madame Hohlakov, running back joyfully to Mitya, \'93here is\
what I was looking for!\'94\
\
It was a tiny silver ikon on a cord, such as is sometimes worn next the\
skin with a cross.\
\
\'93This is from Kiev, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94 she went on reverently, \'93from\
the relics of the Holy Martyr, Varvara. Let me put it on your neck myself,\
and with it dedicate you to a new life, to a new career.\'94\
\
And she actually put the cord round his neck, and began arranging it. In\
extreme embarrassment, Mitya bent down and helped her, and at last he got\
it under his neck\uc0\u8208 tie and collar through his shirt to his chest.\
\
\'93Now you can set off,\'94 Madame Hohlakov pronounced, sitting down\
triumphantly in her place again.\
\
\'93Madam, I am so touched. I don\'92t know how to thank you, indeed ... for\
such kindness, but ... If only you knew how precious time is to me....\
That sum of money, for which I shall be indebted to your generosity....\
Oh, madam, since you are so kind, so touchingly generous to me,\'94 Mitya\
exclaimed impulsively, \'93then let me reveal to you ... though, of course,\
you\'92ve known it a long time ... that I love somebody here.... I have been\
false to Katya ... Katerina Ivanovna I should say.... Oh, I\'92ve behaved\
inhumanly, dishonorably to her, but I fell in love here with another woman\
... a woman whom you, madam, perhaps, despise, for you know everything\
already, but whom I cannot leave on any account, and therefore that three\
thousand now\'97\'94\
\
\'93Leave everything, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94 Madame Hohlakov interrupted in\
the most decisive tone. \'93Leave everything, especially women. Gold\uc0\u8208 mines\
are your goal, and there\'92s no place for women there. Afterwards, when you\
come back rich and famous, you will find the girl of your heart in the\
highest society. That will be a modern girl, a girl of education and\
advanced ideas. By that time the dawning woman question will have gained\
ground, and the new woman will have appeared.\'94\
\
\'93Madam, that\'92s not the point, not at all....\'94 Mitya clasped his hands in\
entreaty.\
\
\'93Yes, it is, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, just what you need; the very thing\
you\'92re yearning for, though you don\'92t realize it yourself. I am not at all\
opposed to the present woman movement, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. The\
development of woman, and even the political emancipation of woman in the\
near future\'97that\'92s my ideal. I\'92ve a daughter myself, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\
people don\'92t know that side of me. I wrote a letter to the author,\
Shtchedrin, on that subject. He has taught me so much, so much about the\
vocation of woman. So last year I sent him an anonymous letter of two\
lines: \'91I kiss and embrace you, my teacher, for the modern woman.\
Persevere.\'92 And I signed myself, \'91A Mother.\'92 I thought of signing myself\
\'91A contemporary Mother,\'92 and hesitated, but I stuck to the simple\
\'91Mother\'92; there\'92s more moral beauty in that, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. And the\
word \'91contemporary\'92 might have reminded him of \'91_The Contemporary_\'92\'97a\
painful recollection owing to the censorship.... Good Heavens, what is the\
matter!\'94\
\
\'93Madam!\'94 cried Mitya, jumping up at last, clasping his hands before her in\
helpless entreaty. \'93You will make me weep if you delay what you have so\
generously\'97\'94\
\
\'93Oh, do weep, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, do weep! That\'92s a noble feeling ...\
such a path lies open before you! Tears will ease your heart, and later on\
you will return rejoicing. You will hasten to me from Siberia on purpose\
to share your joy with me\'97\'94\
\
\'93But allow me, too!\'94 Mitya cried suddenly. \'93For the last time I entreat\
you, tell me, can I have the sum you promised me to\uc0\u8208 day, if not, when may\
I come for it?\'94\
\
\'93What sum, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?\'94\
\
\'93The three thousand you promised me ... that you so generously\'97\'94\
\
\'93Three thousand? Roubles? Oh, no, I haven\'92t got three thousand,\'94 Madame\
Hohlakov announced with serene amazement. Mitya was stupefied.\
\
\'93Why, you said just now ... you said ... you said it was as good as in my\
hands\'97\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no, you misunderstood me, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. In that case you\
misunderstood me. I was talking of the gold\uc0\u8208 mines. It\'92s true I promised\
you more, infinitely more than three thousand, I remember it all now, but\
I was referring to the gold\uc0\u8208 mines.\'94\
\
\'93But the money? The three thousand?\'94 Mitya exclaimed, awkwardly.\
\
\'93Oh, if you meant money, I haven\'92t any. I haven\'92t a penny, Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch. I\'92m quarreling with my steward about it, and I\'92ve just\
borrowed five hundred roubles from Mi\'fcsov, myself. No, no, I\'92ve no money.\
And, do you know, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, if I had, I wouldn\'92t give it to\
you. In the first place I never lend money. Lending money means losing\
friends. And I wouldn\'92t give it to you particularly. I wouldn\'92t give it\
you, because I like you and want to save you, for all you need is the\
gold\uc0\u8208 mines, the gold\u8208 mines, the gold\u8208 mines!\'94\
\
\'93Oh, the devil!\'94 roared Mitya, and with all his might brought his fist\
down on the table.\
\
\'93Aie! Aie!\'94 cried Madame Hohlakov, alarmed, and she flew to the other end\
of the drawing\uc0\u8208 room.\
\
Mitya spat on the ground, and strode rapidly out of the room, out of the\
house, into the street, into the darkness! He walked like one possessed,\
and beating himself on the breast, on the spot where he had struck himself\
two days previously, before Alyosha, the last time he saw him in the dark,\
on the road. What those blows upon his breast signified, _on that spot_,\
and what he meant by it\'97that was, for the time, a secret which was known\
to no one in the world, and had not been told even to Alyosha. But that\
secret meant for him more than disgrace; it meant ruin, suicide. So he had\
determined, if he did not get hold of the three thousand that would pay\
his debt to Katerina Ivanovna, and so remove from his breast, from _that\
spot on his breast_, the shame he carried upon it, that weighed on his\
conscience. All this will be fully explained to the reader later on, but\
now that his last hope had vanished, this man, so strong in appearance,\
burst out crying like a little child a few steps from the Hohlakovs\'92\
house. He walked on, and not knowing what he was doing, wiped away his\
tears with his fist. In this way he reached the square, and suddenly\
became aware that he had stumbled against something. He heard a piercing\
wail from an old woman whom he had almost knocked down.\
\
\'93Good Lord, you\'92ve nearly killed me! Why don\'92t you look where you\'92re\
going, scapegrace?\'94\
\
\'93Why, it\'92s you!\'94 cried Mitya, recognizing the old woman in the dark. It\
was the old servant who waited on Samsonov, whom Mitya had particularly\
noticed the day before.\
\
\'93And who are you, my good sir?\'94 said the old woman, in quite a different\
voice. \'93I don\'92t know you in the dark.\'94\
\
\'93You live at Kuzma Kuzmitch\'92s. You\'92re the servant there?\'94\
\
\'93Just so, sir, I was only running out to Prohoritch\'92s.... But I don\'92t know\
you now.\'94\
\
\'93Tell me, my good woman, is Agrafena Alexandrovna there now?\'94 said Mitya,\
beside himself with suspense. \'93I saw her to the house some time ago.\'94\
\
\'93She has been there, sir. She stayed a little while, and went off again.\'94\
\
\'93What? Went away?\'94 cried Mitya. \'93When did she go?\'94\
\
\'93Why, as soon as she came. She only stayed a minute. She only told Kuzma\
Kuzmitch a tale that made him laugh, and then she ran away.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92re lying, damn you!\'94 roared Mitya.\
\
\'93Aie! Aie!\'94 shrieked the old woman, but Mitya had vanished.\
\
He ran with all his might to the house where Grushenka lived. At the\
moment he reached it, Grushenka was on her way to Mokroe. It was not more\
than a quarter of an hour after her departure.\
\
Fenya was sitting with her grandmother, the old cook, Matryona, in the\
kitchen when \'93the captain\'94 ran in. Fenya uttered a piercing shriek on\
seeing him.\
\
\'93You scream?\'94 roared Mitya, \'93where is she?\'94\
\
But without giving the terror\uc0\u8208 stricken Fenya time to utter a word, he fell\
all of a heap at her feet.\
\
\'93Fenya, for Christ\'92s sake, tell me, where is she?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know. Dmitri Fyodorovitch, my dear, I don\'92t know. You may kill me\
but I can\'92t tell you.\'94 Fenya swore and protested. \'93You went out with her\
yourself not long ago\'97\'94\
\
\'93She came back!\'94\
\
\'93Indeed she didn\'92t. By God I swear she didn\'92t come back.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92re lying!\'94 shouted Mitya. \'93From your terror I know where she is.\'94\
\
He rushed away. Fenya in her fright was glad she had got off so easily.\
But she knew very well that it was only that he was in such haste, or she\
might not have fared so well. But as he ran, he surprised both Fenya and\
old Matryona by an unexpected action. On the table stood a brass mortar,\
with a pestle in it, a small brass pestle, not much more than six inches\
long. Mitya already had opened the door with one hand when, with the\
other, he snatched up the pestle, and thrust it in his side\uc0\u8208 pocket.\
\
\'93Oh, Lord! He\'92s going to murder some one!\'94 cried Fenya, flinging up her\
hands.\
\
\
\
Chapter IV. In The Dark\
\
\
Where was he running? \'93Where could she be except at Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s?\
She must have run straight to him from Samsonov\'92s, that was clear now. The\
whole intrigue, the whole deceit was evident.\'94 ... It all rushed whirling\
through his mind. He did not run to Marya Kondratyevna\'92s. \'93There was no\
need to go there ... not the slightest need ... he must raise no alarm ...\
they would run and tell directly.... Marya Kondratyevna was clearly in the\
plot, Smerdyakov too, he too, all had been bought over!\'94\
\
He formed another plan of action: he ran a long way round Fyodor\
Pavlovitch\'92s house, crossing the lane, running down Dmitrovsky Street,\
then over the little bridge, and so came straight to the deserted alley at\
the back, which was empty and uninhabited, with, on one side the hurdle\
fence of a neighbor\'92s kitchen\uc0\u8208 garden, on the other the strong high fence,\
that ran all round Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s garden. Here he chose a spot,\
apparently the very place, where according to the tradition, he knew\
Lizaveta had once climbed over it: \'93If she could climb over it,\'94 the\
thought, God knows why, occurred to him, \'93surely I can.\'94 He did in fact\
jump up, and instantly contrived to catch hold of the top of the fence.\
Then he vigorously pulled himself up and sat astride on it. Close by, in\
the garden stood the bath\uc0\u8208 house, but from the fence he could see the\
lighted windows of the house too.\
\
\'93Yes, the old man\'92s bedroom is lighted up. She\'92s there!\'94 and he leapt from\
the fence into the garden. Though he knew Grigory was ill and very likely\
Smerdyakov, too, and that there was no one to hear him, he instinctively\
hid himself, stood still, and began to listen. But there was dead silence\
on all sides and, as though of design, complete stillness, not the\
slightest breath of wind.\
\
\'93And naught but the whispering silence,\'94 the line for some reason rose to\
his mind. \'93If only no one heard me jump over the fence! I think not.\'94\
Standing still for a minute, he walked softly over the grass in the\
garden, avoiding the trees and shrubs. He walked slowly, creeping\
stealthily at every step, listening to his own footsteps. It took him five\
minutes to reach the lighted window. He remembered that just under the\
window there were several thick and high bushes of elder and whitebeam.\
The door from the house into the garden on the left\uc0\u8208 hand side, was shut;\
he had carefully looked on purpose to see, in passing. At last he reached\
the bushes and hid behind them. He held his breath. \'93I must wait now,\'94 he\
thought, \'93to reassure them, in case they heard my footsteps and are\
listening ... if only I don\'92t cough or sneeze.\'94\
\
He waited two minutes. His heart was beating violently, and, at moments,\
he could scarcely breathe. \'93No, this throbbing at my heart won\'92t stop,\'94 he\
thought. \'93I can\'92t wait any longer.\'94 He was standing behind a bush in the\
shadow. The light of the window fell on the front part of the bush.\
\
\'93How red the whitebeam berries are!\'94 he murmured, not knowing why. Softly\
and noiselessly, step by step, he approached the window, and raised\
himself on tiptoe. All Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s bedroom lay open before him. It\
was not a large room, and was divided in two parts by a red screen,\
\'93Chinese,\'94 as Fyodor Pavlovitch used to call it. The word \'93Chinese\'94\
flashed into Mitya\'92s mind, \'93and behind the screen, is Grushenka,\'94 thought\
Mitya. He began watching Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was wearing his new\
striped\uc0\u8208 silk dressing\u8208 gown, which Mitya had never seen, and a silk cord\
with tassels round the waist. A clean, dandified shirt of fine linen with\
gold studs peeped out under the collar of the dressing\uc0\u8208 gown. On his head\
Fyodor Pavlovitch had the same red bandage which Alyosha had seen.\
\
\'93He has got himself up,\'94 thought Mitya.\
\
His father was standing near the window, apparently lost in thought.\
Suddenly he jerked up his head, listened a moment, and hearing nothing\
went up to the table, poured out half a glass of brandy from a decanter\
and drank it off. Then he uttered a deep sigh, again stood still a moment,\
walked carelessly up to the looking\uc0\u8208 glass on the wall, with his right hand\
raised the red bandage on his forehead a little, and began examining his\
bruises and scars, which had not yet disappeared.\
\
\'93He\'92s alone,\'94 thought Mitya, \'93in all probability he\'92s alone.\'94\
\
Fyodor Pavlovitch moved away from the looking\uc0\u8208 glass, turned suddenly to\
the window and looked out. Mitya instantly slipped away into the shadow.\
\
\'93She may be there behind the screen. Perhaps she\'92s asleep by now,\'94 he\
thought, with a pang at his heart. Fyodor Pavlovitch moved away from the\
window. \'93He\'92s looking for her out of the window, so she\'92s not there. Why\
should he stare out into the dark? He\'92s wild with impatience.\'94 ... Mitya\
slipped back at once, and fell to gazing in at the window again. The old\
man was sitting down at the table, apparently disappointed. At last he put\
his elbow on the table, and laid his right cheek against his hand. Mitya\
watched him eagerly.\
\
\'93He\'92s alone, he\'92s alone!\'94 he repeated again. \'93If she were here, his face\
would be different.\'94\
\
Strange to say, a queer, irrational vexation rose up in his heart that she\
was not here. \'93It\'92s not that she\'92s not here,\'94 he explained to himself,\
immediately, \'93but that I can\'92t tell for certain whether she is or not.\'94\
Mitya remembered afterwards that his mind was at that moment exceptionally\
clear, that he took in everything to the slightest detail, and missed no\
point. But a feeling of misery, the misery of uncertainty and indecision,\
was growing in his heart with every instant. \'93Is she here or not?\'94 The\
angry doubt filled his heart, and suddenly, making up his mind, he put out\
his hand and softly knocked on the window frame. He knocked the signal the\
old man had agreed upon with Smerdyakov, twice slowly and then three times\
more quickly, the signal that meant \'93Grushenka is here!\'94\
\
The old man started, jerked up his head, and, jumping up quickly, ran to\
the window. Mitya slipped away into the shadow. Fyodor Pavlovitch opened\
the window and thrust his whole head out.\
\
\'93Grushenka, is it you? Is it you?\'94 he said, in a sort of trembling half\uc0\u8208 \
whisper. \'93Where are you, my angel, where are you?\'94 He was fearfully\
agitated and breathless.\
\
\'93He\'92s alone.\'94 Mitya decided.\
\
\'93Where are you?\'94 cried the old man again; and he thrust his head out\
farther, thrust it out to the shoulders, gazing in all directions, right\
and left. \'93Come here, I\'92ve a little present for you. Come, I\'92ll show\
you....\'94\
\
\'93He means the three thousand,\'94 thought Mitya.\
\
\'93But where are you? Are you at the door? I\'92ll open it directly.\'94\
\
And the old man almost climbed out of the window, peering out to the\
right, where there was a door into the garden, trying to see into the\
darkness. In another second he would certainly have run out to open the\
door without waiting for Grushenka\'92s answer.\
\
Mitya looked at him from the side without stirring. The old man\'92s profile\
that he loathed so, his pendent Adam\'92s apple, his hooked nose, his lips\
that smiled in greedy expectation, were all brightly lighted up by the\
slanting lamplight falling on the left from the room. A horrible fury of\
hatred suddenly surged up in Mitya\'92s heart: \'93There he was, his rival, the\
man who had tormented him, had ruined his life!\'94 It was a rush of that\
sudden, furious, revengeful anger of which he had spoken, as though\
foreseeing it, to Alyosha, four days ago in the arbor, when, in answer to\
Alyosha\'92s question, \'93How can you say you\'92ll kill our father?\'94 \'93I don\'92t\
know, I don\'92t know,\'94 he had said then. \'93Perhaps I shall not kill him,\
perhaps I shall. I\'92m afraid he\'92ll suddenly be so loathsome to me at that\
moment. I hate his double chin, his nose, his eyes, his shameless grin. I\
feel a personal repulsion. That\'92s what I\'92m afraid of, that\'92s what may be\
too much for me.\'94 ... This personal repulsion was growing unendurable.\
Mitya was beside himself, he suddenly pulled the brass pestle out of his\
pocket.\
\
                  \uc0\u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \u8208 \
\
\'93God was watching over me then,\'94 Mitya himself said afterwards. At that\
very moment Grigory waked up on his bed of sickness. Earlier in the\
evening he had undergone the treatment which Smerdyakov had described to\
Ivan. He had rubbed himself all over with vodka mixed with a secret, very\
strong decoction, had drunk what was left of the mixture while his wife\
repeated a \'93certain prayer\'94 over him, after which he had gone to bed.\
Marfa Ignatyevna had tasted the stuff, too, and, being unused to strong\
drink, slept like the dead beside her husband.\
\
But Grigory waked up in the night, quite suddenly, and, after a moment\'92s\
reflection, though he immediately felt a sharp pain in his back, he sat up\
in bed. Then he deliberated again, got up and dressed hurriedly. Perhaps\
his conscience was uneasy at the thought of sleeping while the house was\
unguarded \'93in such perilous times.\'94 Smerdyakov, exhausted by his fit, lay\
motionless in the next room. Marfa Ignatyevna did not stir. \'93The stuff\'92s\
been too much for the woman,\'94 Grigory thought, glancing at her, and\
groaning, he went out on the steps. No doubt he only intended to look out\
from the steps, for he was hardly able to walk, the pain in his back and\
his right leg was intolerable. But he suddenly remembered that he had not\
locked the little gate into the garden that evening. He was the most\
punctual and precise of men, a man who adhered to an unchangeable routine,\
and habits that lasted for years. Limping and writhing with pain he went\
down the steps and towards the garden. Yes, the gate stood wide open.\
Mechanically he stepped into the garden. Perhaps he fancied something,\
perhaps caught some sound, and, glancing to the left he saw his master\'92s\
window open. No one was looking out of it then.\
\
\'93What\'92s it open for? It\'92s not summer now,\'94 thought Grigory, and suddenly,\
at that very instant he caught a glimpse of something extraordinary before\
him in the garden. Forty paces in front of him a man seemed to be running\
in the dark, a sort of shadow was moving very fast.\
\
\'93Good Lord!\'94 cried Grigory beside himself, and forgetting the pain in his\
back, he hurried to intercept the running figure. He took a short cut,\
evidently he knew the garden better; the flying figure went towards the\
bath\uc0\u8208 house, ran behind it and rushed to the garden fence. Grigory\
followed, not losing sight of him, and ran, forgetting everything. He\
reached the fence at the very moment the man was climbing over it. Grigory\
cried out, beside himself, pounced on him, and clutched his leg in his two\
hands.\
\
Yes, his foreboding had not deceived him. He recognized him, it was he,\
the \'93monster,\'94 the \'93parricide.\'94\
\
\'93Parricide!\'94 the old man shouted so that the whole neighborhood could\
hear, but he had not time to shout more, he fell at once, as though struck\
by lightning.\
\
Mitya jumped back into the garden and bent over the fallen man. In Mitya\'92s\
hands was a brass pestle, and he flung it mechanically in the grass. The\
pestle fell two paces from Grigory, not in the grass but on the path, in a\
most conspicuous place. For some seconds he examined the prostrate figure\
before him. The old man\'92s head was covered with blood. Mitya put out his\
hand and began feeling it. He remembered afterwards clearly, that he had\
been awfully anxious to make sure whether he had broken the old man\'92s\
skull, or simply stunned him with the pestle. But the blood was flowing\
horribly; and in a moment Mitya\'92s fingers were drenched with the hot\
stream. He remembered taking out of his pocket the clean white\
handkerchief with which he had provided himself for his visit to Madame\
Hohlakov, and putting it to the old man\'92s head, senselessly trying to wipe\
the blood from his face and temples. But the handkerchief was instantly\
soaked with blood.\
\
\'93Good heavens! what am I doing it for?\'94 thought Mitya, suddenly pulling\
himself together. \'93If I have broken his skull, how can I find out now? And\
what difference does it make now?\'94 he added, hopelessly. \'93If I\'92ve killed\
him, I\'92ve killed him.... You\'92ve come to grief, old man, so there you must\
lie!\'94 he said aloud. And suddenly turning to the fence, he vaulted over it\
into the lane and fell to running\'97the handkerchief soaked with blood he\
held, crushed up in his right fist, and as he ran he thrust it into the\
back pocket of his coat. He ran headlong, and the few passers\uc0\u8208 by who met\
him in the dark, in the streets, remembered afterwards that they had met a\
man running that night. He flew back again to the widow Morozov\'92s house.\
\
Immediately after he had left it that evening, Fenya had rushed to the\
chief porter, Nazar Ivanovitch, and besought him, for Christ\'92s sake, \'93not\
to let the captain in again to\uc0\u8208 day or to\u8208 morrow.\'94 Nazar Ivanovitch\
promised, but went upstairs to his mistress who had suddenly sent for him,\
and meeting his nephew, a boy of twenty, who had recently come from the\
country, on the way up told him to take his place, but forgot to mention\
\'93the captain.\'94 Mitya, running up to the gate, knocked. The lad instantly\
recognized him, for Mitya had more than once tipped him. Opening the gate\
at once, he let him in, and hastened to inform him with a good\uc0\u8208 humored\
smile that \'93Agrafena Alexandrovna is not at home now, you know.\'94\
\
\'93Where is she then, Prohor?\'94 asked Mitya, stopping short.\
\
\'93She set off this evening, some two hours ago, with Timofey, to Mokroe.\'94\
\
\'93What for?\'94 cried Mitya.\
\
\'93That I can\'92t say. To see some officer. Some one invited her and horses\
were sent to fetch her.\'94\
\
Mitya left him, and ran like a madman to Fenya.\
\
\
\
Chapter V. A Sudden Resolution\
\
\
She was sitting in the kitchen with her grandmother; they were both just\
going to bed. Relying on Nazar Ivanovitch, they had not locked themselves\
in. Mitya ran in, pounced on Fenya and seized her by the throat.\
\
\'93Speak at once! Where is she? With whom is she now, at Mokroe?\'94 he roared\
furiously.\
\
Both the women squealed.\
\
\'93Aie! I\'92ll tell you. Aie! Dmitri Fyodorovitch, darling, I\'92ll tell you\
everything directly, I won\'92t hide anything,\'94 gabbled Fenya, frightened to\
death; \'93she\'92s gone to Mokroe, to her officer.\'94\
\
\'93What officer?\'94 roared Mitya.\
\
\'93To her officer, the same one she used to know, the one who threw her over\
five years ago,\'94 cackled Fenya, as fast as she could speak.\
\
Mitya withdrew the hands with which he was squeezing her throat. He stood\
facing her, pale as death, unable to utter a word, but his eyes showed\
that he realized it all, all, from the first word, and guessed the whole\
position. Poor Fenya was not in a condition at that moment to observe\
whether he understood or not. She remained sitting on the trunk as she had\
been when he ran into the room, trembling all over, holding her hands out\
before her as though trying to defend herself. She seemed to have grown\
rigid in that position. Her wide\uc0\u8208 opened, scared eyes were fixed immovably\
upon him. And to make matters worse, both his hands were smeared with\
blood. On the way, as he ran, he must have touched his forehead with them,\
wiping off the perspiration, so that on his forehead and his right cheek\
were blood\uc0\u8208 stained patches. Fenya was on the verge of hysterics. The old\
cook had jumped up and was staring at him like a mad woman, almost\
unconscious with terror.\
\
Mitya stood for a moment, then mechanically sank on to a chair next to\
Fenya. He sat, not reflecting but, as it were, terror\uc0\u8208 stricken, benumbed.\
Yet everything was clear as day: that officer, he knew about him, he knew\
everything perfectly, he had known it from Grushenka herself, had known\
that a letter had come from him a month before. So that for a month, for a\
whole month, this had been going on, a secret from him, till the very\
arrival of this new man, and he had never thought of him! But how could\
he, how could he not have thought of him? Why was it he had forgotten this\
officer, like that, forgotten him as soon as he heard of him? That was the\
question that faced him like some monstrous thing. And he looked at this\
monstrous thing with horror, growing cold with horror.\
\
But suddenly, as gently and mildly as a gentle and affectionate child, he\
began speaking to Fenya as though he had utterly forgotten how he had\
scared and hurt her just now. He fell to questioning Fenya with an extreme\
preciseness, astonishing in his position, and though the girl looked\
wildly at his blood\uc0\u8208 stained hands, she, too, with wonderful readiness and\
rapidity, answered every question as though eager to put the whole truth\
and nothing but the truth before him. Little by little, even with a sort\
of enjoyment, she began explaining every detail, not wanting to torment\
him, but, as it were, eager to be of the utmost service to him. She\
described the whole of that day, in great detail, the visit of Rakitin and\
Alyosha, how she, Fenya, had stood on the watch, how the mistress had set\
off, and how she had called out of the window to Alyosha to give him,\
Mitya, her greetings, and to tell him \'93to remember for ever how she had\
loved him for an hour.\'94\
\
Hearing of the message, Mitya suddenly smiled, and there was a flush of\
color on his pale cheeks. At the same moment Fenya said to him, not a bit\
afraid now to be inquisitive:\
\
\'93Look at your hands, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. They\'92re all over blood!\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 answered Mitya mechanically. He looked carelessly at his hands and\
at once forgot them and Fenya\'92s question.\
\
He sank into silence again. Twenty minutes had passed since he had run in.\
His first horror was over, but evidently some new fixed determination had\
taken possession of him. He suddenly stood up, smiling dreamily.\
\
\'93What has happened to you, sir?\'94 said Fenya, pointing to his hands again.\
She spoke compassionately, as though she felt very near to him now in his\
grief. Mitya looked at his hands again.\
\
\'93That\'92s blood, Fenya,\'94 he said, looking at her with a strange expression.\
\'93That\'92s human blood, and my God! why was it shed? But ... Fenya ...\
there\'92s a fence here\'94 (he looked at her as though setting her a riddle),\
\'93a high fence, and terrible to look at. But at dawn to\uc0\u8208 morrow, when the\
sun rises, Mitya will leap over that fence.... You don\'92t understand what\
fence, Fenya, and, never mind.... You\'92ll hear to\uc0\u8208 morrow and understand ...\
and now, good\uc0\u8208 by. I won\'92t stand in her way. I\'92ll step aside, I know how to\
step aside. Live, my joy.... You loved me for an hour, remember Mityenka\
Karamazov so for ever.... She always used to call me Mityenka, do you\
remember?\'94\
\
And with those words he went suddenly out of the kitchen. Fenya was almost\
more frightened at this sudden departure than she had been when he ran in\
and attacked her.\
\
Just ten minutes later Dmitri went in to Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin, the young\
official with whom he had pawned his pistols. It was by now half\uc0\u8208 past\
eight, and Pyotr Ilyitch had finished his evening tea, and had just put\
his coat on again to go to the \'93Metropolis\'94 to play billiards. Mitya\
caught him coming out.\
\
Seeing him with his face all smeared with blood, the young man uttered a\
cry of surprise.\
\
\'93Good heavens! What is the matter?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve come for my pistols,\'94 said Mitya, \'93and brought you the money. And\
thanks very much. I\'92m in a hurry, Pyotr Ilyitch, please make haste.\'94\
\
Pyotr Ilyitch grew more and more surprised; he suddenly caught sight of a\
bundle of bank\uc0\u8208 notes in Mitya\'92s hand, and what was more, he had walked in\
holding the notes as no one walks in and no one carries money: he had them\
in his right hand, and held them outstretched as if to show them.\
Perhotin\'92s servant\uc0\u8208 boy, who met Mitya in the passage, said afterwards that\
he walked into the passage in the same way, with the money outstretched in\
his hand, so he must have been carrying them like that even in the\
streets. They were all rainbow\uc0\u8208 colored hundred\u8208 rouble notes, and the\
fingers holding them were covered with blood.\
\
When Pyotr Ilyitch was questioned later on as to the sum of money, he said\
that it was difficult to judge at a glance, but that it might have been\
two thousand, or perhaps three, but it was a big, \'93fat\'94 bundle. \'93Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch,\'94 so he testified afterwards, \'93seemed unlike himself, too;\
not drunk, but, as it were, exalted, lost to everything, but at the same\
time, as it were, absorbed, as though pondering and searching for\
something and unable to come to a decision. He was in great haste,\
answered abruptly and very strangely, and at moments seemed not at all\
dejected but quite cheerful.\'94\
\
\'93But what _is_ the matter with you? What\'92s wrong?\'94 cried Pyotr Ilyitch,\
looking wildly at his guest. \'93How is it that you\'92re all covered with\
blood? Have you had a fall? Look at yourself!\'94\
\
He took him by the elbow and led him to the glass.\
\
Seeing his blood\uc0\u8208 stained face, Mitya started and scowled wrathfully.\
\
\'93Damnation! That\'92s the last straw,\'94 he muttered angrily, hurriedly\
changing the notes from his right hand to the left, and impulsively jerked\
the handkerchief out of his pocket. But the handkerchief turned out to be\
soaked with blood, too (it was the handkerchief he had used to wipe\
Grigory\'92s face). There was scarcely a white spot on it, and it had not\
merely begun to dry, but had stiffened into a crumpled ball and could not\
be pulled apart. Mitya threw it angrily on the floor.\
\
\'93Oh, damn it!\'94 he said. \'93Haven\'92t you a rag of some sort ... to wipe my\
face?\'94\
\
\'93So you\'92re only stained, not wounded? You\'92d better wash,\'94 said Pyotr\
Ilyitch. \'93Here\'92s a wash\uc0\u8208 stand. I\'92ll pour you out some water.\'94\
\
\'93A wash\uc0\u8208 stand? That\'92s all right ... but where am I to put this?\'94\
\
With the strangest perplexity he indicated his bundle of hundred\uc0\u8208 rouble\
notes, looking inquiringly at Pyotr Ilyitch as though it were for him to\
decide what he, Mitya, was to do with his own money.\
\
\'93In your pocket, or on the table here. They won\'92t be lost.\'94\
\
\'93In my pocket? Yes, in my pocket. All right.... But, I say, that\'92s all\
nonsense,\'94 he cried, as though suddenly coming out of his absorption.\
\'93Look here, let\'92s first settle that business of the pistols. Give them\
back to me. Here\'92s your money ... because I am in great need of them ...\
and I haven\'92t a minute, a minute to spare.\'94\
\
And taking the topmost note from the bundle he held it out to Pyotr\
Ilyitch.\
\
\'93But I shan\'92t have change enough. Haven\'92t you less?\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 said Mitya, looking again at the bundle, and as though not trusting\
his own words he turned over two or three of the topmost ones.\
\
\'93No, they\'92re all alike,\'94 he added, and again he looked inquiringly at\
Pyotr Ilyitch.\
\
\'93How have you grown so rich?\'94 the latter asked. \'93Wait, I\'92ll send my boy to\
Plotnikov\'92s, they close late\'97to see if they won\'92t change it. Here, Misha!\'94\
he called into the passage.\
\
\'93To Plotnikov\'92s shop\'97first\uc0\u8208 rate!\'94 cried Mitya, as though struck by an\
idea. \'93Misha,\'94 he turned to the boy as he came in, \'93look here, run to\
Plotnikov\'92s and tell them that Dmitri Fyodorovitch sends his greetings,\
and will be there directly.... But listen, listen, tell them to have\
champagne, three dozen bottles, ready before I come, and packed as it was\
to take to Mokroe. I took four dozen with me then,\'94 he added (suddenly\
addressing Pyotr Ilyitch); \'93they know all about it, don\'92t you trouble,\
Misha,\'94 he turned again to the boy. \'93Stay, listen; tell them to put in\
cheese, Strasburg pies, smoked fish, ham, caviare, and everything,\
everything they\'92ve got, up to a hundred roubles, or a hundred and twenty\
as before.... But wait: don\'92t let them forget dessert, sweets, pears,\
water\uc0\u8208 melons, two or three or four\'97no, one melon\'92s enough, and chocolate,\
candy, toffee, fondants; in fact, everything I took to Mokroe before,\
three hundred roubles\'92 worth with the champagne ... let it be just the\
same again. And remember, Misha, if you are called Misha\'97His name is\
Misha, isn\'92t it?\'94 He turned to Pyotr Ilyitch again.\
\
\'93Wait a minute,\'94 Protr Ilyitch intervened, listening and watching him\
uneasily, \'93you\'92d better go yourself and tell them. He\'92ll muddle it.\'94\
\
\'93He will, I see he will! Eh, Misha! Why, I was going to kiss you for the\
commission.... If you don\'92t make a mistake, there\'92s ten roubles for you,\
run along, make haste.... Champagne\'92s the chief thing, let them bring up\
champagne. And brandy, too, and red and white wine, and all I had then....\
They know what I had then.\'94\
\
\'93But listen!\'94 Pyotr Ilyitch interrupted with some impatience. \'93I say, let\
him simply run and change the money and tell them not to close, and you go\
and tell them.... Give him your note. Be off, Misha! Put your best leg\
forward!\'94\
\
Pyotr Ilyitch seemed to hurry Misha off on purpose, because the boy\
remained standing with his mouth and eyes wide open, apparently\
understanding little of Mitya\'92s orders, gazing up with amazement and\
terror at his blood\uc0\u8208 stained face and the trembling bloodstained fingers\
that held the notes.\
\
\'93Well, now come and wash,\'94 said Pyotr Ilyitch sternly. \'93Put the money on\
the table or else in your pocket.... That\'92s right, come along. But take\
off your coat.\'94\
\
And beginning to help him off with his coat, he cried out again:\
\
\'93Look, your coat\'92s covered with blood, too!\'94\
\
\'93That ... it\'92s not the coat. It\'92s only a little here on the sleeve.... And\
that\'92s only here where the handkerchief lay. It must have soaked through.\
I must have sat on the handkerchief at Fenya\'92s, and the blood\'92s come\
through,\'94 Mitya explained at once with a childlike unconsciousness that\
was astounding. Pyotr Ilyitch listened, frowning.\
\
\'93Well, you must have been up to something; you must have been fighting\
with some one,\'94 he muttered.\
\
They began to wash. Pyotr Ilyitch held the jug and poured out the water.\
Mitya, in desperate haste, scarcely soaped his hands (they were trembling,\
and Pyotr Ilyitch remembered it afterwards). But the young official\
insisted on his soaping them thoroughly and rubbing them more. He seemed\
to exercise more and more sway over Mitya, as time went on. It may be\
noted in passing that he was a young man of sturdy character.\
\
\'93Look, you haven\'92t got your nails clean. Now rub your face; here, on your\
temples, by your ear.... Will you go in that shirt? Where are you going?\
Look, all the cuff of your right sleeve is covered with blood.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, it\'92s all bloody,\'94 observed Mitya, looking at the cuff of his shirt.\
\
\'93Then change your shirt.\'94\
\
\'93I haven\'92t time. You see I\'92ll ...\'94 Mitya went on with the same confiding\
ingenuousness, drying his face and hands on the towel, and putting on his\
coat. \'93I\'92ll turn it up at the wrist. It won\'92t be seen under the coat....\
You see!\'94\
\
\'93Tell me now, what game have you been up to? Have you been fighting with\
some one? In the tavern again, as before? Have you been beating that\
captain again?\'94 Pyotr Ilyitch asked him reproachfully. \'93Whom have you been\
beating now ... or killing, perhaps?\'94\
\
\'93Nonsense!\'94 said Mitya.\
\
\'93Why \'91nonsense\'92?\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t worry,\'94 said Mitya, and he suddenly laughed. \'93I smashed an old\
woman in the market\uc0\u8208 place just now.\'94\
\
\'93Smashed? An old woman?\'94\
\
\'93An old man!\'94 cried Mitya, looking Pyotr Ilyitch straight in the face,\
laughing, and shouting at him as though he were deaf.\
\
\'93Confound it! An old woman, an old man.... Have you killed some one?\'94\
\
\'93We made it up. We had a row\'97and made it up. In a place I know of. We\
parted friends. A fool.... He\'92s forgiven me.... He\'92s sure to have forgiven\
me by now ... if he had got up, he wouldn\'92t have forgiven me\'94\'97Mitya\
suddenly winked\'97\'93only damn him, you know, I say, Pyotr Ilyitch, damn him!\
Don\'92t worry about him! I don\'92t want to just now!\'94 Mitya snapped out,\
resolutely.\
\
\'93Whatever do you want to go picking quarrels with every one for? ... Just\
as you did with that captain over some nonsense.... You\'92ve been fighting\
and now you\'92re rushing off on the spree\'97that\'92s you all over! Three dozen\
champagne\'97what do you want all that for?\'94\
\
\'93Bravo! Now give me the pistols. Upon my honor I\'92ve no time now. I should\
like to have a chat with you, my dear boy, but I haven\'92t the time. And\
there\'92s no need, it\'92s too late for talking. Where\'92s my money? Where have I\
put it?\'94 he cried, thrusting his hands into his pockets.\
\
\'93You put it on the table ... yourself.... Here it is. Had you forgotten?\
Money\'92s like dirt or water to you, it seems. Here are your pistols. It\'92s\
an odd thing, at six o\'92clock you pledged them for ten roubles, and now\
you\'92ve got thousands. Two or three I should say.\'94\
\
\'93Three, you bet,\'94 laughed Mitya, stuffing the notes into the side\uc0\u8208 pocket\
of his trousers.\
\
\'93You\'92ll lose it like that. Have you found a gold\uc0\u8208 mine?\'94\
\
\'93The mines? The gold\uc0\u8208 mines?\'94 Mitya shouted at the top of his voice and\
went off into a roar of laughter. \'93Would you like to go to the mines,\
Perhotin? There\'92s a lady here who\'92ll stump up three thousand for you, if\
only you\'92ll go. She did it for me, she\'92s so awfully fond of gold\uc0\u8208 mines. Do\
you know Madame Hohlakov?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know her, but I\'92ve heard of her and seen her. Did she really give\
you three thousand? Did she really?\'94 said Pyotr Ilyitch, eyeing him\
dubiously.\
\
\'93As soon as the sun rises to\uc0\u8208 morrow, as soon as Ph\'9cbus, ever young, flies\
upwards, praising and glorifying God, you go to her, this Madame Hohlakov,\
and ask her whether she did stump up that three thousand or not. Try and\
find out.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know on what terms you are ... since you say it so positively, I\
suppose she did give it to you. You\'92ve got the money in your hand, but\
instead of going to Siberia you\'92re spending it all.... Where are you\
really off to now, eh?\'94\
\
\'93To Mokroe.\'94\
\
\'93To Mokroe? But it\'92s night!\'94\
\
\'93Once the lad had all, now the lad has naught,\'94 cried Mitya suddenly.\
\
\'93How \'91naught\'92? You say that with all those thousands!\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m not talking about thousands. Damn thousands! I\'92m talking of the\
female character.\
\
\
    Fickle is the heart of woman\
    Treacherous and full of vice;\
\
\
I agree with Ulysses. That\'92s what he says.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t understand you!\'94\
\
\'93Am I drunk?\'94\
\
\'93Not drunk, but worse.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m drunk in spirit, Pyotr Ilyitch, drunk in spirit! But that\'92s enough!\'94\
\
\'93What are you doing, loading the pistol?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m loading the pistol.\'94\
\
Unfastening the pistol\uc0\u8208 case, Mitya actually opened the powder horn, and\
carefully sprinkled and rammed in the charge. Then he took the bullet and,\
before inserting it, held it in two fingers in front of the candle.\
\
\'93Why are you looking at the bullet?\'94 asked Pyotr Ilyitch, watching him\
with uneasy curiosity.\
\
\'93Oh, a fancy. Why, if you meant to put that bullet in your brain, would\
you look at it or not?\'94\
\
\'93Why look at it?\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s going into my brain, so it\'92s interesting to look and see what it\'92s\
like. But that\'92s foolishness, a moment\'92s foolishness. Now that\'92s done,\'94 he\
added, putting in the bullet and driving it home with the ramrod. \'93Pyotr\
Ilyitch, my dear fellow, that\'92s nonsense, all nonsense, and if only you\
knew what nonsense! Give me a little piece of paper now.\'94\
\
\'93Here\'92s some paper.\'94\
\
\'93No, a clean new piece, writing\uc0\u8208 paper. That\'92s right.\'94\
\
And taking a pen from the table, Mitya rapidly wrote two lines, folded the\
paper in four, and thrust it in his waistcoat pocket. He put the pistols\
in the case, locked it up, and kept it in his hand. Then he looked at\
Pyotr Ilyitch with a slow, thoughtful smile.\
\
\'93Now, let\'92s go.\'94\
\
\'93Where are we going? No, wait a minute.... Are you thinking of putting\
that bullet in your brain, perhaps?\'94 Pyotr Ilyitch asked uneasily.\
\
\'93I was fooling about the bullet! I want to live. I love life! You may be\
sure of that. I love golden\uc0\u8208 haired Ph\'9cbus and his warm light.... Dear\
Pyotr Ilyitch, do you know how to step aside?\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean by \'91stepping aside\'92?\'94\
\
\'93Making way. Making way for a dear creature, and for one I hate. And to\
let the one I hate become dear\'97that\'92s what making way means! And to say to\
them: God bless you, go your way, pass on, while I\'97\'94\
\
\'93While you\'97?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s enough, let\'92s go.\'94\
\
\'93Upon my word. I\'92ll tell some one to prevent your going there,\'94 said Pyotr\
Ilyitch, looking at him. \'93What are you going to Mokroe for, now?\'94\
\
\'93There\'92s a woman there, a woman. That\'92s enough for you. You shut up.\'94\
\
\'93Listen, though you\'92re such a savage I\'92ve always liked you.... I feel\
anxious.\'94\
\
\'93Thanks, old fellow. I\'92m a savage you say. Savages, savages! That\'92s what I\
am always saying. Savages! Why, here\'92s Misha! I was forgetting him.\'94\
\
Misha ran in, post\uc0\u8208 haste, with a handful of notes in change, and reported\
that every one was in a bustle at the Plotnikovs\'92; \'93They\'92re carrying down\
the bottles, and the fish, and the tea; it will all be ready directly.\'94\
Mitya seized ten roubles and handed it to Pyotr Ilyitch, then tossed\
another ten\uc0\u8208 rouble note to Misha.\
\
\'93Don\'92t dare to do such a thing!\'94 cried Pyotr Ilyitch. \'93I won\'92t have it in\
my house, it\'92s a bad, demoralizing habit. Put your money away. Here, put\
it here, why waste it? It would come in handy to\uc0\u8208 morrow, and I dare say\
you\'92ll be coming to me to borrow ten roubles again. Why do you keep\
putting the notes in your side\uc0\u8208 pocket? Ah, you\'92ll lose them!\'94\
\
\'93I say, my dear fellow, let\'92s go to Mokroe together.\'94\
\
\'93What should I go for?\'94\
\
\'93I say, let\'92s open a bottle at once, and drink to life! I want to drink,\
and especially to drink with you. I\'92ve never drunk with you, have I?\'94\
\
\'93Very well, we can go to the \'91Metropolis.\'92 I was just going there.\'94\
\
\'93I haven\'92t time for that. Let\'92s drink at the Plotnikovs\'92, in the back\
room. Shall I ask you a riddle?\'94\
\
\'93Ask away.\'94\
\
Mitya took the piece of paper out of his waistcoat pocket, unfolded it and\
showed it. In a large, distinct hand was written: \'93I punish myself for my\
whole life, my whole life I punish!\'94\
\
\'93I will certainly speak to some one, I\'92ll go at once,\'94 said Pyotr Ilyitch,\
after reading the paper.\
\
\'93You won\'92t have time, dear boy, come and have a drink. March!\'94\
\
Plotnikov\'92s shop was at the corner of the street, next door but one to\
Pyotr Ilyitch\'92s. It was the largest grocery shop in our town, and by no\
means a bad one, belonging to some rich merchants. They kept everything\
that could be got in a Petersburg shop, grocery of all sort, wines\
\'93bottled by the brothers Eliseyev,\'94 fruits, cigars, tea, coffee, sugar,\
and so on. There were three shop\uc0\u8208 assistants and two errand boys always\
employed. Though our part of the country had grown poorer, the landowners\
had gone away, and trade had got worse, yet the grocery stores flourished\
as before, every year with increasing prosperity; there were plenty of\
purchasers for their goods.\
\
They were awaiting Mitya with impatience in the shop. They had vivid\
recollections of how he had bought, three or four weeks ago, wine and\
goods of all sorts to the value of several hundred roubles, paid for in\
cash (they would never have let him have anything on credit, of course).\
They remembered that then, as now, he had had a bundle of hundred\uc0\u8208 rouble\
notes in his hand, and had scattered them at random, without bargaining,\
without reflecting, or caring to reflect what use so much wine and\
provisions would be to him. The story was told all over the town that,\
driving off then with Grushenka to Mokroe, he had \'93spent three thousand in\
one night and the following day, and had come back from the spree without\
a penny.\'94 He had picked up a whole troop of gypsies (encamped in our\
neighborhood at the time), who for two days got money without stint out of\
him while he was drunk, and drank expensive wine without stint. People\
used to tell, laughing at Mitya, how he had given champagne to grimy\uc0\u8208 \
handed peasants, and feasted the village women and girls on sweets and\
Strasburg pies. Though to laugh at Mitya to his face was rather a risky\
proceeding, there was much laughter behind his back, especially in the\
tavern, at his own ingenuous public avowal that all he had got out of\
Grushenka by this \'93escapade\'94 was \'93permission to kiss her foot, and that\
was the utmost she had allowed him.\'94\
\
By the time Mitya and Pyotr Ilyitch reached the shop, they found a cart\
with three horses harnessed abreast with bells, and with Andrey, the\
driver, ready waiting for Mitya at the entrance. In the shop they had\
almost entirely finished packing one box of provisions, and were only\
waiting for Mitya\'92s arrival to nail it down and put it in the cart. Pyotr\
Ilyitch was astounded.\
\
\'93Where did this cart come from in such a hurry?\'94 he asked Mitya.\
\
\'93I met Andrey as I ran to you, and told him to drive straight here to the\
shop. There\'92s no time to lose. Last time I drove with Timofey, but Timofey\
now has gone on before me with the witch. Shall we be very late, Andrey?\'94\
\
\'93They\'92ll only get there an hour at most before us, not even that maybe. I\
got Timofey ready to start. I know how he\'92ll go. Their pace won\'92t be ours,\
Dmitri Fyodorovitch. How could it be? They won\'92t get there an hour\
earlier!\'94 Andrey, a lanky, red\uc0\u8208 haired, middle\u8208 aged driver, wearing a full\u8208 \
skirted coat, and with a kaftan on his arm, replied warmly.\
\
\'93Fifty roubles for vodka if we\'92re only an hour behind them.\'94\
\
\'93I warrant the time, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. Ech, they won\'92t be half an hour\
before us, let alone an hour.\'94\
\
Though Mitya bustled about seeing after things, he gave his orders\
strangely, as it were disconnectedly, and inconsecutively. He began a\
sentence and forgot the end of it. Pyotr Ilyitch found himself obliged to\
come to the rescue.\
\
\'93Four hundred roubles\'92 worth, not less than four hundred roubles\'92 worth,\
just as it was then,\'94 commanded Mitya. \'93Four dozen champagne, not a bottle\
less.\'94\
\
\'93What do you want with so much? What\'92s it for? Stay!\'94 cried Pyotr Ilyitch.\
\'93What\'92s this box? What\'92s in it? Surely there isn\'92t four hundred roubles\'92\
worth here?\'94\
\
The officious shopmen began explaining with oily politeness that the first\
box contained only half a dozen bottles of champagne, and only \'93the most\
indispensable articles,\'94 such as savories, sweets, toffee, etc. But the\
main part of the goods ordered would be packed and sent off, as on the\
previous occasion, in a special cart also with three horses traveling at\
full speed, so that it would arrive not more than an hour later than\
Dmitri Fyodorovitch himself.\
\
\'93Not more than an hour! Not more than an hour! And put in more toffee and\
fondants. The girls there are so fond of it,\'94 Mitya insisted hotly.\
\
\'93The fondants are all right. But what do you want with four dozen of\
champagne? One would be enough,\'94 said Pyotr Ilyitch, almost angry. He\
began bargaining, asking for a bill of the goods, and refused to be\
satisfied. But he only succeeded in saving a hundred roubles. In the end\
it was agreed that only three hundred roubles\'92 worth should be sent.\
\
\'93Well, you may go to the devil!\'94 cried Pyotr Ilyitch, on second thoughts.\
\'93What\'92s it to do with me? Throw away your money, since it\'92s cost you\
nothing.\'94\
\
\'93This way, my economist, this way, don\'92t be angry.\'94 Mitya drew him into a\
room at the back of the shop. \'93They\'92ll give us a bottle here directly.\
We\'92ll taste it. Ech, Pyotr Ilyitch, come along with me, for you\'92re a nice\
fellow, the sort I like.\'94\
\
Mitya sat down on a wicker chair, before a little table, covered with a\
dirty dinner\uc0\u8208 napkin. Pyotr Ilyitch sat down opposite, and the champagne\
soon appeared, and oysters were suggested to the gentlemen. \'93First\uc0\u8208 class\
oysters, the last lot in.\'94\
\
\'93Hang the oysters. I don\'92t eat them. And we don\'92t need anything,\'94 cried\
Pyotr Ilyitch, almost angrily.\
\
\'93There\'92s no time for oysters,\'94 said Mitya. \'93And I\'92m not hungry. Do you\
know, friend,\'94 he said suddenly, with feeling, \'93I never have liked all\
this disorder.\'94\
\
\'93Who does like it? Three dozen of champagne for peasants, upon my word,\
that\'92s enough to make any one angry!\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s not what I mean. I\'92m talking of a higher order. There\'92s no order\
in me, no higher order. But ... that\'92s all over. There\'92s no need to grieve\
about it. It\'92s too late, damn it! My whole life has been disorder, and one\
must set it in order. Is that a pun, eh?\'94\
\
\'93You\'92re raving, not making puns!\'94\
\
\
    \'93Glory be to God in Heaven,\
    Glory be to God in me....\
\
\
\'93That verse came from my heart once, it\'92s not a verse, but a tear.... I\
made it myself ... not while I was pulling the captain\'92s beard,\
though....\'94\
\
\'93Why do you bring him in all of a sudden?\'94\
\
\'93Why do I bring him in? Foolery! All things come to an end; all things are\
made equal. That\'92s the long and short of it.\'94\
\
\'93You know, I keep thinking of your pistols.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s all foolery, too! Drink, and don\'92t be fanciful. I love life. I\'92ve\
loved life too much, shamefully much. Enough! Let\'92s drink to life, dear\
boy, I propose the toast. Why am I pleased with myself? I\'92m a scoundrel,\
but I\'92m satisfied with myself. And yet I\'92m tortured by the thought that\
I\'92m a scoundrel, but satisfied with myself. I bless the creation. I\'92m\
ready to bless God and His creation directly, but ... I must kill one\
noxious insect for fear it should crawl and spoil life for others.... Let\
us drink to life, dear brother. What can be more precious than life?\
Nothing! To life, and to one queen of queens!\'94\
\
\'93Let\'92s drink to life and to your queen, too, if you like.\'94\
\
They drank a glass each. Although Mitya was excited and expansive, yet he\
was melancholy, too. It was as though some heavy, overwhelming anxiety\
were weighing upon him.\
\
\'93Misha ... here\'92s your Misha come! Misha, come here, my boy, drink this\
glass to Ph\'9cbus, the golden\uc0\u8208 haired, of to\u8208 morrow morn....\'94\
\
\'93What are you giving it him for?\'94 cried Pyotr Ilyitch, irritably.\
\
\'93Yes, yes, yes, let me! I want to!\'94\
\
\'93E\'97ech!\'94\
\
Misha emptied the glass, bowed, and ran out.\
\
\'93He\'92ll remember it afterwards,\'94 Mitya remarked. \'93Woman, I love woman! What\
is woman? The queen of creation! My heart is sad, my heart is sad, Pyotr\
Ilyitch. Do you remember Hamlet? \'91I am very sorry, good Horatio! Alas,\
poor Yorick!\'92 Perhaps that\'92s me, Yorick? Yes, I\'92m Yorick now, and a skull\
afterwards.\'94\
\
Pyotr Ilyitch listened in silence. Mitya, too, was silent for a while.\
\
\'93What dog\'92s that you\'92ve got here?\'94 he asked the shopman, casually,\
noticing a pretty little lap\uc0\u8208 dog with dark eyes, sitting in the corner.\
\
\'93It belongs to Varvara Alexyevna, the mistress,\'94 answered the clerk. \'93She\
brought it and forgot it here. It must be taken back to her.\'94\
\
\'93I saw one like it ... in the regiment ...\'94 murmured Mitya dreamily, \'93only\
that one had its hind leg broken.... By the way, Pyotr Ilyitch, I wanted\
to ask you: have you ever stolen anything in your life?\'94\
\
\'93What a question!\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I didn\'92t mean anything. From somebody\'92s pocket, you know. I don\'92t\
mean government money, every one steals that, and no doubt you do,\
too....\'94\
\
\'93You go to the devil.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m talking of other people\'92s money. Stealing straight out of a pocket?\
Out of a purse, eh?\'94\
\
\'93I stole twenty copecks from my mother when I was nine years old. I took\
it off the table on the sly, and held it tight in my hand.\'94\
\
\'93Well, and what happened?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, nothing. I kept it three days, then I felt ashamed, confessed, and\
gave it back.\'94\
\
\'93And what then?\'94\
\
\'93Naturally I was whipped. But why do you ask? Have you stolen something?\'94\
\
\'93I have,\'94 said Mitya, winking slyly.\
\
\'93What have you stolen?\'94 inquired Pyotr Ilyitch curiously.\
\
\'93I stole twenty copecks from my mother when I was nine years old, and gave\
it back three days after.\'94\
\
As he said this, Mitya suddenly got up.\
\
\'93Dmitri Fyodorovitch, won\'92t you come now?\'94 called Andrey from the door of\
the shop.\
\
\'93Are you ready? We\'92ll come!\'94 Mitya started. \'93A few more last words\
and\'97Andrey, a glass of vodka at starting. Give him some brandy as well!\
That box\'94 (the one with the pistols) \'93put under my seat. Good\uc0\u8208 by, Pyotr\
Ilyitch, don\'92t remember evil against me.\'94\
\
\'93But you\'92re coming back to\uc0\u8208 morrow?\'94\
\
\'93Of course.\'94\
\
\'93Will you settle the little bill now?\'94 cried the clerk, springing forward.\
\
\'93Oh, yes, the bill. Of course.\'94\
\
He pulled the bundle of notes out of his pocket again, picked out three\
hundred roubles, threw them on the counter, and ran hurriedly out of the\
shop. Every one followed him out, bowing and wishing him good luck.\
Andrey, coughing from the brandy he had just swallowed, jumped up on the\
box. But Mitya was only just taking his seat when suddenly to his surprise\
he saw Fenya before him. She ran up panting, clasped her hands before him\
with a cry, and plumped down at his feet.\
\
\'93Dmitri Fyodorovitch, dear good Dmitri Fyodorovitch, don\'92t harm my\
mistress. And it was I told you all about it.... And don\'92t murder him, he\
came first, he\'92s hers! He\'92ll marry Agrafena Alexandrovna now. That\'92s why\
he\'92s come back from Siberia. Dmitri Fyodorovitch, dear, don\'92t take a\
fellow creature\'92s life!\'94\
\
\'93Tut\'97tut\'97tut! That\'92s it, is it? So you\'92re off there to make trouble!\'94\
muttered Pyotr Ilyitch. \'93Now, it\'92s all clear, as clear as daylight. Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch, give me your pistols at once if you mean to behave like a\
man,\'94 he shouted aloud to Mitya. \'93Do you hear, Dmitri?\'94\
\
\'93The pistols? Wait a bit, brother, I\'92ll throw them into the pool on the\
road,\'94 answered Mitya. \'93Fenya, get up, don\'92t kneel to me. Mitya won\'92t hurt\
any one, the silly fool won\'92t hurt any one again. But I say, Fenya,\'94 he\
shouted, after having taken his seat. \'93I hurt you just now, so forgive me\
and have pity on me, forgive a scoundrel.... But it doesn\'92t matter if you\
don\'92t. It\'92s all the same now. Now then, Andrey, look alive, fly along full\
speed!\'94\
\
Andrey whipped up the horses, and the bells began ringing.\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by, Pyotr Ilyitch! My last tear is for you!...\'94\
\
\'93He\'92s not drunk, but he keeps babbling like a lunatic,\'94 Pyotr Ilyitch\
thought as he watched him go. He had half a mind to stay and see the cart\
packed with the remaining wines and provisions, knowing that they would\
deceive and defraud Mitya. But, suddenly feeling vexed with himself, he\
turned away with a curse and went to the tavern to play billiards.\
\
\'93He\'92s a fool, though he\'92s a good fellow,\'94 he muttered as he went. \'93I\'92ve\
heard of that officer, Grushenka\'92s former flame. Well, if he has turned\
up.... Ech, those pistols! Damn it all! I\'92m not his nurse! Let them do\
what they like! Besides, it\'92ll all come to nothing. They\'92re a set of\
brawlers, that\'92s all. They\'92ll drink and fight, fight and make friends\
again. They are not men who do anything real. What does he mean by \'91I\'92m\
stepping aside, I\'92m punishing myself?\'92 It\'92ll come to nothing! He\'92s shouted\
such phrases a thousand times, drunk, in the taverns. But now he\'92s not\
drunk. \'91Drunk in spirit\'92\'97they\'92re fond of fine phrases, the villains. Am I\
his nurse? He must have been fighting, his face was all over blood. With\
whom? I shall find out at the \'91Metropolis.\'92 And his handkerchief was\
soaked in blood.... It\'92s still lying on my floor.... Hang it!\'94\
\
He reached the tavern in a bad humor and at once made up a game. The game\
cheered him. He played a second game, and suddenly began telling one of\
his partners that Dmitri Karamazov had come in for some cash\
again\'97something like three thousand roubles, and had gone to Mokroe again\
to spend it with Grushenka.... This news roused singular interest in his\
listeners. They all spoke of it, not laughing, but with a strange gravity.\
They left off playing.\
\
\'93Three thousand? But where can he have got three thousand?\'94\
\
Questions were asked. The story of Madame Hohlakov\'92s present was received\
with skepticism.\
\
\'93Hasn\'92t he robbed his old father?\'97that\'92s the question.\'94\
\
\'93Three thousand! There\'92s something odd about it.\'94\
\
\'93He boasted aloud that he would kill his father; we all heard him, here.\
And it was three thousand he talked about ...\'94\
\
Pyotr Ilyitch listened. All at once he became short and dry in his\
answers. He said not a word about the blood on Mitya\'92s face and hands,\
though he had meant to speak of it at first.\
\
They began a third game, and by degrees the talk about Mitya died away.\
But by the end of the third game, Pyotr Ilyitch felt no more desire for\
billiards; he laid down the cue, and without having supper as he had\
intended, he walked out of the tavern. When he reached the market\uc0\u8208 place he\
stood still in perplexity, wondering at himself. He realized that what he\
wanted was to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s and find out if anything had\
happened there. \'93On account of some stupid nonsense\'97as it\'92s sure to turn\
out\'97am I going to wake up the household and make a scandal? Fooh! damn it,\
is it my business to look after them?\'94\
\
In a very bad humor he went straight home, and suddenly remembered Fenya.\
\'93Damn it all! I ought to have questioned her just now,\'94 he thought with\
vexation, \'93I should have heard everything.\'94 And the desire to speak to\
her, and so find out, became so pressing and importunate that when he was\
half\uc0\u8208 way home he turned abruptly and went towards the house where\
Grushenka lodged. Going up to the gate he knocked. The sound of the knock\
in the silence of the night sobered him and made him feel annoyed. And no\
one answered him; every one in the house was asleep.\
\
\'93And I shall be making a fuss!\'94 he thought, with a feeling of positive\
discomfort. But instead of going away altogether, he fell to knocking\
again with all his might, filling the street with clamor.\
\
\'93Not coming? Well, I will knock them up, I will!\'94 he muttered at each\
knock, fuming at himself, but at the same time he redoubled his knocks on\
the gate.\
\
\
\
Chapter VI. \'93I Am Coming, Too!\'94\
\
\
But Dmitri Fyodorovitch was speeding along the road. It was a little more\
than twenty versts to Mokroe, but Andrey\'92s three horses galloped at such a\
pace that the distance might be covered in an hour and a quarter. The\
swift motion revived Mitya. The air was fresh and cool, there were big\
stars shining in the sky. It was the very night, and perhaps the very\
hour, in which Alyosha fell on the earth, and rapturously swore to love it\
for ever and ever.\
\
All was confusion, confusion, in Mitya\'92s soul, but although many things\
were goading his heart, at that moment his whole being was yearning for\
her, his queen, to whom he was flying to look on her for the last time.\
One thing I can say for certain; his heart did not waver for one instant.\
I shall perhaps not be believed when I say that this jealous lover felt\
not the slightest jealousy of this new rival, who seemed to have sprung\
out of the earth. If any other had appeared on the scene, he would have\
been jealous at once, and would perhaps have stained his fierce hands with\
blood again. But as he flew through the night, he felt no envy, no\
hostility even, for the man who had been her first lover.... It is true he\
had not yet seen him.\
\
\'93Here there was no room for dispute: it was her right and his; this was\
her first love which, after five years, she had not forgotten; so she had\
loved him only for those five years, and I, how do I come in? What right\
have I? Step aside, Mitya, and make way! What am I now? Now everything is\
over apart from the officer\'97even if he had not appeared, everything would\
be over ...\'94\
\
These words would roughly have expressed his feelings, if he had been\
capable of reasoning. But he could not reason at that moment. His present\
plan of action had arisen without reasoning. At Fenya\'92s first words, it\
had sprung from feeling, and been adopted in a flash, with all its\
consequences. And yet, in spite of his resolution, there was confusion in\
his soul, an agonizing confusion: his resolution did not give him peace.\
There was so much behind that tortured him. And it seemed strange to him,\
at moments, to think that he had written his own sentence of death with\
pen and paper: \'93I punish myself,\'94 and the paper was lying there in his\
pocket, ready; the pistol was loaded; he had already resolved how, next\
morning, he would meet the first warm ray of \'93golden\uc0\u8208 haired Ph\'9cbus.\'94\
\
And yet he could not be quit of the past, of all that he had left behind\
and that tortured him. He felt that miserably, and the thought of it sank\
into his heart with despair. There was one moment when he felt an impulse\
to stop Andrey, to jump out of the cart, to pull out his loaded pistol,\
and to make an end of everything without waiting for the dawn. But that\
moment flew by like a spark. The horses galloped on, \'93devouring space,\'94\
and as he drew near his goal, again the thought of her, of her alone, took\
more and more complete possession of his soul, chasing away the fearful\
images that had been haunting it. Oh, how he longed to look upon her, if\
only for a moment, if only from a distance!\
\
\'93She\'92s now with _him_,\'94 he thought, \'93now I shall see what she looks like\
with him, her first love, and that\'92s all I want.\'94 Never had this woman,\
who was such a fateful influence in his life, aroused such love in his\
breast, such new and unknown feeling, surprising even to himself, a\
feeling tender to devoutness, to self\uc0\u8208 effacement before her! \'93I will\
efface myself!\'94 he said, in a rush of almost hysterical ecstasy.\
\
They had been galloping nearly an hour. Mitya was silent, and though\
Andrey was, as a rule, a talkative peasant, he did not utter a word,\
either. He seemed afraid to talk, he only whipped up smartly his three\
lean, but mettlesome, bay horses. Suddenly Mitya cried out in horrible\
anxiety:\
\
\'93Andrey! What if they\'92re asleep?\'94\
\
This thought fell upon him like a blow. It had not occurred to him before.\
\
\'93It may well be that they\'92re gone to bed, by now, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.\'94\
\
Mitya frowned as though in pain. Yes, indeed ... he was rushing there ...\
with such feelings ... while they were asleep ... she was asleep, perhaps,\
there too.... An angry feeling surged up in his heart.\
\
\'93Drive on, Andrey! Whip them up! Look alive!\'94 he cried, beside himself.\
\
\'93But maybe they\'92re not in bed!\'94 Andrey went on after a pause. \'93Timofey\
said they were a lot of them there\'97\'94\
\
\'93At the station?\'94\
\
\'93Not at the posting\uc0\u8208 station, but at Plastunov\'92s, at the inn, where they\
let out horses, too.\'94\
\
\'93I know. So you say there are a lot of them? How\'92s that? Who are they?\'94\
cried Mitya, greatly dismayed at this unexpected news.\
\
\'93Well, Timofey was saying they\'92re all gentlefolk. Two from our town\'97who\
they are I can\'92t say\'97and there are two others, strangers, maybe more\
besides. I didn\'92t ask particularly. They\'92ve set to playing cards, so\
Timofey said.\'94\
\
\'93Cards?\'94\
\
\'93So, maybe they\'92re not in bed if they\'92re at cards. It\'92s most likely not\
more than eleven.\'94\
\
\'93Quicker, Andrey! Quicker!\'94 Mitya cried again, nervously.\
\
\'93May I ask you something, sir?\'94 said Andrey, after a pause. \'93Only I\'92m\
afraid of angering you, sir.\'94\
\
\'93What is it?\'94\
\
\'93Why, Fenya threw herself at your feet just now, and begged you not to\
harm her mistress, and some one else, too ... so you see, sir\'97 It\'92s I am\
taking you there ... forgive me, sir, it\'92s my conscience ... maybe it\'92s\
stupid of me to speak of it\'97\'94\
\
Mitya suddenly seized him by the shoulders from behind.\
\
\'93Are you a driver?\'94 he asked frantically.\
\
\'93Yes, sir.\'94\
\
\'93Then you know that one has to make way. What would you say to a driver\
who wouldn\'92t make way for any one, but would just drive on and crush\
people? No, a driver mustn\'92t run over people. One can\'92t run over a man.\
One can\'92t spoil people\'92s lives. And if you have spoilt a life\'97punish\
yourself.... If only you\'92ve spoilt, if only you\'92ve ruined any one\'92s\
life\'97punish yourself and go away.\'94\
\
These phrases burst from Mitya almost hysterically. Though Andrey was\
surprised at him, he kept up the conversation.\
\
\'93That\'92s right, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, you\'92re quite right, one mustn\'92t crush\
or torment a man, or any kind of creature, for every creature is created\
by God. Take a horse, for instance, for some folks, even among us drivers,\
drive anyhow. Nothing will restrain them, they just force it along.\'94\
\
\'93To hell?\'94 Mitya interrupted, and went off into his abrupt, short laugh.\
\'93Andrey, simple soul,\'94 he seized him by the shoulders again, \'93tell me,\
will Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov go to hell, or not, what do you think?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know, darling, it depends on you, for you are ... you see, sir,\
when the Son of God was nailed on the Cross and died, He went straight\
down to hell from the Cross, and set free all sinners that were in agony.\
And the devil groaned, because he thought that he would get no more\
sinners in hell. And God said to him, then, \'91Don\'92t groan, for you shall\
have all the mighty of the earth, the rulers, the chief judges, and the\
rich men, and shall be filled up as you have been in all the ages till I\
come again.\'92 Those were His very words ...\'94\
\
\'93A peasant legend! Capital! Whip up the left, Andrey!\'94\
\
\'93So you see, sir, who it is hell\'92s for,\'94 said Andrey, whipping up the left\
horse, \'93but you\'92re like a little child ... that\'92s how we look on you ...\
and though you\'92re hasty\uc0\u8208 tempered, sir, yet God will forgive you for your\
kind heart.\'94\
\
\'93And you, do you forgive me, Andrey?\'94\
\
\'93What should I forgive you for, sir? You\'92ve never done me any harm.\'94\
\
\'93No, for every one, for every one, you here alone, on the road, will you\
forgive me for every one? Speak, simple peasant heart!\'94\
\
\'93Oh, sir! I feel afraid of driving you, your talk is so strange.\'94\
\
But Mitya did not hear. He was frantically praying and muttering to\
himself.\
\
\'93Lord, receive me, with all my lawlessness, and do not condemn me. Let me\
pass by Thy judgment ... do not condemn me, for I have condemned myself,\
do not condemn me, for I love Thee, O Lord. I am a wretch, but I love\
Thee. If Thou sendest me to hell, I shall love Thee there, and from there\
I shall cry out that I love Thee for ever and ever.... But let me love to\
the end.... Here and now for just five hours ... till the first light of\
Thy day ... for I love the queen of my soul ... I love her and I cannot\
help loving her. Thou seest my whole heart.... I shall gallop up, I shall\
fall before her and say, \'91You are right to pass on and leave me. Farewell\
and forget your victim ... never fret yourself about me!\'92 \'94\
\
\'93Mokroe!\'94 cried Andrey, pointing ahead with his whip.\
\
Through the pale darkness of the night loomed a solid black mass of\
buildings, flung down, as it were, in the vast plain. The village of\
Mokroe numbered two thousand inhabitants, but at that hour all were\
asleep, and only here and there a few lights still twinkled.\
\
\'93Drive on, Andrey, I come!\'94 Mitya exclaimed, feverishly.\
\
\'93They\'92re not asleep,\'94 said Andrey again, pointing with his whip to the\
Plastunovs\'92 inn, which was at the entrance to the village. The six\
windows, looking on the street, were all brightly lighted up.\
\
\'93They\'92re not asleep,\'94 Mitya repeated joyously. \'93Quicker, Andrey! Gallop!\
Drive up with a dash! Set the bells ringing! Let all know that I have\
come. I\'92m coming! I\'92m coming, too!\'94\
\
Andrey lashed his exhausted team into a gallop, drove with a dash and\
pulled up his steaming, panting horses at the high flight of steps.\
\
Mitya jumped out of the cart just as the innkeeper, on his way to bed,\
peeped out from the steps curious to see who had arrived.\
\
\'93Trifon Borissovitch, is that you?\'94\
\
The innkeeper bent down, looked intently, ran down the steps, and rushed\
up to the guest with obsequious delight.\
\
\'93Dmitri Fyodorovitch, your honor! Do I see you again?\'94\
\
Trifon Borissovitch was a thick\uc0\u8208 set, healthy peasant, of middle height,\
with a rather fat face. His expression was severe and uncompromising,\
especially with the peasants of Mokroe, but he had the power of assuming\
the most obsequious countenance, when he had an inkling that it was to his\
interest. He dressed in Russian style, with a shirt buttoning down on one\
side, and a full\uc0\u8208 skirted coat. He had saved a good sum of money, but was\
for ever dreaming of improving his position. More than half the peasants\
were in his clutches, every one in the neighborhood was in debt to him.\
From the neighboring landowners he bought and rented lands which were\
worked by the peasants, in payment of debts which they could never shake\
off. He was a widower, with four grown\uc0\u8208 up daughters. One of them was\
already a widow and lived in the inn with her two children, his\
grandchildren, and worked for him like a charwoman. Another of his\
daughters was married to a petty official, and in one of the rooms of the\
inn, on the wall could be seen, among the family photographs, a miniature\
photograph of this official in uniform and official epaulettes. The two\
younger daughters used to wear fashionable blue or green dresses, fitting\
tight at the back, and with trains a yard long, on Church holidays or when\
they went to pay visits. But next morning they would get up at dawn, as\
usual, sweep out the rooms with a birch\uc0\u8208 broom, empty the slops, and clean\
up after lodgers.\
\
In spite of the thousands of roubles he had saved, Trifon Borissovitch was\
very fond of emptying the pockets of a drunken guest, and remembering that\
not a month ago he had, in twenty\uc0\u8208 four hours, made two if not three\
hundred roubles out of Dmitri, when he had come on his escapade with\
Grushenka, he met him now with eager welcome, scenting his prey the moment\
Mitya drove up to the steps.\
\
\'93Dmitri Fyodorovitch, dear sir, we see you once more!\'94\
\
\'93Stay, Trifon Borissovitch,\'94 began Mitya, \'93first and foremost, where is\
she?\'94\
\
\'93Agrafena Alexandrovna?\'94 The inn\uc0\u8208 keeper understood at once, looking\
sharply into Mitya\'92s face. \'93She\'92s here, too ...\'94\
\
\'93With whom? With whom?\'94\
\
\'93Some strangers. One is an official gentleman, a Pole, to judge from his\
speech. He sent the horses for her from here; and there\'92s another with\
him, a friend of his, or a fellow traveler, there\'92s no telling. They\'92re\
dressed like civilians.\'94\
\
\'93Well, are they feasting? Have they money?\'94\
\
\'93Poor sort of a feast! Nothing to boast of, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.\'94\
\
\'93Nothing to boast of? And who are the others?\'94\
\
\'93They\'92re two gentlemen from the town.... They\'92ve come back from Tcherny,\
and are putting up here. One\'92s quite a young gentleman, a relative of Mr.\
Mi\'fcsov, he must be, but I\'92ve forgotten his name ... and I expect you know\
the other, too, a gentleman called Maximov. He\'92s been on a pilgrimage, so\
he says, to the monastery in the town. He\'92s traveling with this young\
relation of Mr. Mi\'fcsov.\'94\
\
\'93Is that all?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93Stay, listen, Trifon Borissovitch. Tell me the chief thing: What of her?\
How is she?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, she\'92s only just come. She\'92s sitting with them.\'94\
\
\'93Is she cheerful? Is she laughing?\'94\
\
\'93No, I think she\'92s not laughing much. She\'92s sitting quite dull. She\'92s\
combing the young gentleman\'92s hair.\'94\
\
\'93The Pole\'97the officer?\'94\
\
\'93He\'92s not young, and he\'92s not an officer, either. Not him, sir. It\'92s the\
young gentleman that\'92s Mr. Mi\'fcsov\'92s relation ... I\'92ve forgotten his name.\'94\
\
\'93Kalganov.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s it, Kalganov!\'94\
\
\'93All right. I\'92ll see for myself. Are they playing cards?\'94\
\
\'93They have been playing, but they\'92ve left off. They\'92ve been drinking tea,\
the official gentleman asked for liqueurs.\'94\
\
\'93Stay, Trifon Borissovitch, stay, my good soul, I\'92ll see for myself. Now\
answer one more question: are the gypsies here?\'94\
\
\'93You can\'92t have the gypsies now, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. The authorities have\
sent them away. But we\'92ve Jews that play the cymbals and the fiddle in the\
village, so one might send for them. They\'92d come.\'94\
\
\'93Send for them. Certainly send for them!\'94 cried Mitya. \'93And you can get\
the girls together as you did then, Marya especially, Stepanida, too, and\
Arina. Two hundred roubles for a chorus!\'94\
\
\'93Oh, for a sum like that I can get all the village together, though by now\
they\'92re asleep. Are the peasants here worth such kindness, Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch, or the girls either? To spend a sum like that on such\
coarseness and rudeness! What\'92s the good of giving a peasant a cigar to\
smoke, the stinking ruffian! And the girls are all lousy. Besides, I\'92ll\
get my daughters up for nothing, let alone a sum like that. They\'92ve only\
just gone to bed, I\'92ll give them a kick and set them singing for you. You\
gave the peasants champagne to drink the other day, e\'97ech!\'94\
\
For all his pretended compassion for Mitya, Trifon Borissovitch had hidden\
half a dozen bottles of champagne on that last occasion, and had picked up\
a hundred\uc0\u8208 rouble note under the table, and it had remained in his\
clutches.\
\
\'93Trifon Borissovitch, I sent more than one thousand flying last time I was\
here. Do you remember?\'94\
\
\'93You did send it flying. I may well remember. You must have left three\
thousand behind you.\'94\
\
\'93Well, I\'92ve come to do the same again, do you see?\'94\
\
And he pulled out his roll of notes, and held them up before the\
innkeeper\'92s nose.\
\
\'93Now, listen and remember. In an hour\'92s time the wine will arrive,\
savories, pies, and sweets\'97bring them all up at once. That box Andrey has\
got is to be brought up at once, too. Open it, and hand champagne\
immediately. And the girls, we must have the girls, Marya especially.\'94\
\
He turned to the cart and pulled out the box of pistols.\
\
\'93Here, Andrey, let\'92s settle. Here\'92s fifteen roubles for the drive, and\
fifty for vodka ... for your readiness, for your love.... Remember\
Karamazov!\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m afraid, sir,\'94 faltered Andrey. \'93Give me five roubles extra, but more\
I won\'92t take. Trifon Borissovitch, bear witness. Forgive my foolish words\
...\'94\
\
\'93What are you afraid of?\'94 asked Mitya, scanning him. \'93Well, go to the\
devil, if that\'92s it!\'94 he cried, flinging him five roubles. \'93Now, Trifon\
Borissovitch, take me up quietly and let me first get a look at them, so\
that they don\'92t see me. Where are they? In the blue room?\'94\
\
Trifon Borissovitch looked apprehensively at Mitya, but at once obediently\
did his bidding. Leading him into the passage, he went himself into the\
first large room, adjoining that in which the visitors were sitting, and\
took the light away. Then he stealthily led Mitya in, and put him in a\
corner in the dark, whence he could freely watch the company without being\
seen. But Mitya did not look long, and, indeed, he could not see them, he\
saw her, his heart throbbed violently, and all was dark before his eyes.\
\
She was sitting sideways to the table in a low chair, and beside her, on\
the sofa, was the pretty youth, Kalganov. She was holding his hand and\
seemed to be laughing, while he, seeming vexed and not looking at her, was\
saying something in a loud voice to Maximov, who sat the other side of the\
table, facing Grushenka. Maximov was laughing violently at something. On\
the sofa sat _he_, and on a chair by the sofa there was another stranger.\
The one on the sofa was lolling backwards, smoking a pipe, and Mitya had\
an impression of a stoutish, broad\uc0\u8208 faced, short little man, who was\
apparently angry about something. His friend, the other stranger, struck\
Mitya as extraordinarily tall, but he could make out nothing more. He\
caught his breath. He could not bear it for a minute, he put the pistol\uc0\u8208 \
case on a chest, and with a throbbing heart he walked, feeling cold all\
over, straight into the blue room to face the company.\
\
\'93Aie!\'94 shrieked Grushenka, the first to notice him.\
\
\
\
Chapter VII. The First And Rightful Lover\
\
\
With his long, rapid strides, Mitya walked straight up to the table.\
\
\'93Gentlemen,\'94 he said in a loud voice, almost shouting, yet stammering at\
every word, \'93I ... I\'92m all right! Don\'92t be afraid!\'94 he exclaimed,\
\'93I\'97there\'92s nothing the matter,\'94 he turned suddenly to Grushenka, who had\
shrunk back in her chair towards Kalganov, and clasped his hand tightly.\
\'93I ... I\'92m coming, too. I\'92m here till morning. Gentlemen, may I stay with\
you till morning? Only till morning, for the last time, in this same\
room?\'94\
\
So he finished, turning to the fat little man, with the pipe, sitting on\
the sofa. The latter removed his pipe from his lips with dignity and\
observed severely:\
\
\'93_Panie_, we\'92re here in private. There are other rooms.\'94\
\
\'93Why, it\'92s you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch! What do you mean?\'94 answered Kalganov\
suddenly. \'93Sit down with us. How are you?\'94\
\
\'93Delighted to see you, dear ... and precious fellow, I always thought a\
lot of you.\'94 Mitya responded, joyfully and eagerly, at once holding out\
his hand across the table.\
\
\'93Aie! How tight you squeeze! You\'92ve quite broken my fingers,\'94 laughed\
Kalganov.\
\
\'93He always squeezes like that, always,\'94 Grushenka put in gayly, with a\
timid smile, seeming suddenly convinced from Mitya\'92s face that he was not\
going to make a scene. She was watching him with intense curiosity and\
still some uneasiness. She was impressed by something about him, and\
indeed the last thing she expected of him was that he would come in and\
speak like this at such a moment.\
\
\'93Good evening,\'94 Maximov ventured blandly on the left. Mitya rushed up to\
him, too.\
\
\'93Good evening. You\'92re here, too! How glad I am to find you here, too!\
Gentlemen, gentlemen, I\'97\'94 (He addressed the Polish gentleman with the pipe\
again, evidently taking him for the most important person present.) \'93I\
flew here.... I wanted to spend my last day, my last hour in this room, in\
this very room ... where I, too, adored ... my queen.... Forgive me,\
_panie_,\'94 he cried wildly, \'93I flew here and vowed\'97 Oh, don\'92t be afraid,\
it\'92s my last night! Let\'92s drink to our good understanding. They\'92ll bring\
the wine at once.... I brought this with me.\'94 (Something made him pull out\
his bundle of notes.) \'93Allow me, _panie_! I want to have music, singing, a\
revel, as we had before. But the worm, the unnecessary worm, will crawl\
away, and there\'92ll be no more of him. I will commemorate my day of joy on\
my last night.\'94\
\
He was almost choking. There was so much, so much he wanted to say, but\
strange exclamations were all that came from his lips. The Pole gazed\
fixedly at him, at the bundle of notes in his hand; looked at Grushenka,\
and was in evident perplexity.\
\
\'93If my suverin lady is permitting\'97\'94 he was beginning.\
\
\'93What does \'91suverin\'92 mean? \'91Sovereign,\'92 I suppose?\'94 interrupted Grushenka.\
\'93I can\'92t help laughing at you, the way you talk. Sit down, Mitya, what are\
you talking about? Don\'92t frighten us, please. You won\'92t frighten us, will\
you? If you won\'92t, I am glad to see you ...\'94\
\
\'93Me, me frighten you?\'94 cried Mitya, flinging up his hands. \'93Oh, pass me\
by, go your way, I won\'92t hinder you!...\'94\
\
And suddenly he surprised them all, and no doubt himself as well, by\
flinging himself on a chair, and bursting into tears, turning his head\
away to the opposite wall, while his arms clasped the back of the chair\
tight, as though embracing it.\
\
\'93Come, come, what a fellow you are!\'94 cried Grushenka reproachfully.\
\'93That\'92s just how he comes to see me\'97he begins talking, and I can\'92t make\
out what he means. He cried like that once before, and now he\'92s crying\
again! It\'92s shameful! Why are you crying? _As though you had anything to\
cry for!_\'94 she added enigmatically, emphasizing each word with some\
irritability.\
\
\'93I ... I\'92m not crying.... Well, good evening!\'94 He instantly turned round\
in his chair, and suddenly laughed, not his abrupt wooden laugh, but a\
long, quivering, inaudible nervous laugh.\
\
\'93Well, there you are again.... Come, cheer up, cheer up!\'94 Grushenka said\
to him persuasively. \'93I\'92m very glad you\'92ve come, very glad, Mitya, do you\
hear, I\'92m very glad! I want him to stay here with us,\'94 she said\
peremptorily, addressing the whole company, though her words were\
obviously meant for the man sitting on the sofa. \'93I wish it, I wish it!\
And if he goes away I shall go, too!\'94 she added with flashing eyes.\
\
\'93What my queen commands is law!\'94 pronounced the Pole, gallantly kissing\
Grushenka\'92s hand. \'93I beg you, _panie_, to join our company,\'94 he added\
politely, addressing Mitya.\
\
Mitya was jumping up with the obvious intention of delivering another\
tirade, but the words did not come.\
\
\'93Let\'92s drink, _panie_,\'94 he blurted out instead of making a speech. Every\
one laughed.\
\
\'93Good heavens! I thought he was going to begin again!\'94 Grushenka exclaimed\
nervously. \'93Do you hear, Mitya,\'94 she went on insistently, \'93don\'92t prance\
about, but it\'92s nice you\'92ve brought the champagne. I want some myself, and\
I can\'92t bear liqueurs. And best of all, you\'92ve come yourself. We were\
fearfully dull here.... You\'92ve come for a spree again, I suppose? But put\
your money in your pocket. Where did you get such a lot?\'94\
\
Mitya had been, all this time, holding in his hand the crumpled bundle of\
notes on which the eyes of all, especially of the Poles, were fixed. In\
confusion he thrust them hurriedly into his pocket. He flushed. At that\
moment the innkeeper brought in an uncorked bottle of champagne, and\
glasses on a tray. Mitya snatched up the bottle, but he was so bewildered\
that he did not know what to do with it. Kalganov took it from him and\
poured out the champagne.\
\
\'93Another! Another bottle!\'94 Mitya cried to the innkeeper, and, forgetting\
to clink glasses with the Pole whom he had so solemnly invited to drink to\
their good understanding, he drank off his glass without waiting for any\
one else. His whole countenance suddenly changed. The solemn and tragic\
expression with which he had entered vanished completely, and a look of\
something childlike came into his face. He seemed to have become suddenly\
gentle and subdued. He looked shyly and happily at every one, with a\
continual nervous little laugh, and the blissful expression of a dog who\
has done wrong, been punished, and forgiven. He seemed to have forgotten\
everything, and was looking round at every one with a childlike smile of\
delight. He looked at Grushenka, laughing continually, and bringing his\
chair close up to her. By degrees he had gained some idea of the two\
Poles, though he had formed no definite conception of them yet.\
\
The Pole on the sofa struck him by his dignified demeanor and his Polish\
accent; and, above all, by his pipe. \'93Well, what of it? It\'92s a good thing\
he\'92s smoking a pipe,\'94 he reflected. The Pole\'92s puffy, middle\uc0\u8208 aged face,\
with its tiny nose and two very thin, pointed, dyed and impudent\uc0\u8208 looking\
mustaches, had not so far roused the faintest doubts in Mitya. He was not\
even particularly struck by the Pole\'92s absurd wig made in Siberia, with\
love\uc0\u8208 locks foolishly combed forward over the temples. \'93I suppose it\'92s all\
right since he wears a wig,\'94 he went on, musing blissfully. The other,\
younger Pole, who was staring insolently and defiantly at the company and\
listening to the conversation with silent contempt, still only impressed\
Mitya by his great height, which was in striking contrast to the Pole on\
the sofa. \'93If he stood up he\'92d be six foot three.\'94 The thought flitted\
through Mitya\'92s mind. It occurred to him, too, that this Pole must be the\
friend of the other, as it were, a \'93bodyguard,\'94 and no doubt the big Pole\
was at the disposal of the little Pole with the pipe. But this all seemed\
to Mitya perfectly right and not to be questioned. In his mood of doglike\
submissiveness all feeling of rivalry had died away.\
\
Grushenka\'92s mood and the enigmatic tone of some of her words he completely\
failed to grasp. All he understood, with thrilling heart, was that she was\
kind to him, that she had forgiven him, and made him sit by her. He was\
beside himself with delight, watching her sip her glass of champagne. The\
silence of the company seemed somehow to strike him, however, and he\
looked round at every one with expectant eyes.\
\
\'93Why are we sitting here though, gentlemen? Why don\'92t you begin doing\
something?\'94 his smiling eyes seemed to ask.\
\
\'93He keeps talking nonsense, and we were all laughing,\'94 Kalganov began\
suddenly, as though divining his thought, and pointing to Maximov.\
\
Mitya immediately stared at Kalganov and then at Maximov.\
\
\'93He\'92s talking nonsense?\'94 he laughed, his short, wooden laugh, seeming\
suddenly delighted at something\'97\'93ha ha!\'94\
\
\'93Yes. Would you believe it, he will have it that all our cavalry officers\
in the twenties married Polish women. That\'92s awful rot, isn\'92t it?\'94\
\
\'93Polish women?\'94 repeated Mitya, perfectly ecstatic.\
\
Kalganov was well aware of Mitya\'92s attitude to Grushenka, and he guessed\
about the Pole, too, but that did not so much interest him, perhaps did\
not interest him at all; what he was interested in was Maximov. He had\
come here with Maximov by chance, and he met the Poles here at the inn for\
the first time in his life. Grushenka he knew before, and had once been\
with some one to see her; but she had not taken to him. But here she\
looked at him very affectionately: before Mitya\'92s arrival, she had been\
making much of him, but he seemed somehow to be unmoved by it. He was a\
boy, not over twenty, dressed like a dandy, with a very charming fair\uc0\u8208 \
skinned face, and splendid thick, fair hair. From his fair face looked out\
beautiful pale blue eyes, with an intelligent and sometimes even deep\
expression, beyond his age indeed, although the young man sometimes looked\
and talked quite like a child, and was not at all ashamed of it, even when\
he was aware of it himself. As a rule he was very willful, even\
capricious, though always friendly. Sometimes there was something fixed\
and obstinate in his expression. He would look at you and listen, seeming\
all the while to be persistently dreaming over something else. Often he\
was listless and lazy, at other times he would grow excited, sometimes,\
apparently, over the most trivial matters.\
\
\'93Only imagine, I\'92ve been taking him about with me for the last four days,\'94\
he went on, indolently drawling his words, quite naturally though, without\
the slightest affectation. \'93Ever since your brother, do you remember,\
shoved him off the carriage and sent him flying. That made me take an\
interest in him at the time, and I took him into the country, but he keeps\
talking such rot I\'92m ashamed to be with him. I\'92m taking him back.\'94\
\
\'93The gentleman has not seen Polish ladies, and says what is impossible,\'94\
the Pole with the pipe observed to Maximov.\
\
He spoke Russian fairly well, much better, anyway, than he pretended. If\
he used Russian words, he always distorted them into a Polish form.\
\
\'93But I was married to a Polish lady myself,\'94 tittered Maximov.\
\
\'93But did you serve in the cavalry? You were talking about the cavalry.\
Were you a cavalry officer?\'94 put in Kalganov at once.\
\
\'93Was he a cavalry officer indeed? Ha ha!\'94 cried Mitya, listening eagerly,\
and turning his inquiring eyes to each as he spoke, as though there were\
no knowing what he might hear from each.\
\
\'93No, you see,\'94 Maximov turned to him. \'93What I mean is that those pretty\
Polish ladies ... when they danced the mazurka with our Uhlans ... when\
one of them dances a mazurka with a Uhlan she jumps on his knee like a\
kitten ... a little white one ... and the _pan_\uc0\u8208 father and _pan_\u8208 mother\
look on and allow it.... They allow it ... and next day the Uhlan comes\
and offers her his hand.... That\'92s how it is ... offers her his hand, he\
he!\'94 Maximov ended, tittering.\
\
\'93The _pan_ is a _lajdak_!\'94 the tall Pole on the chair growled suddenly and\
crossed one leg over the other. Mitya\'92s eye was caught by his huge greased\
boot, with its thick, dirty sole. The dress of both the Poles looked\
rather greasy.\
\
\'93Well, now it\'92s _lajdak_! What\'92s he scolding about?\'94 said Grushenka,\
suddenly vexed.\
\
\'93_Pani_ Agrippina, what the gentleman saw in Poland were servant girls,\
and not ladies of good birth,\'94 the Pole with the pipe observed to\
Grushenka.\
\
\'93You can reckon on that,\'94 the tall Pole snapped contemptuously.\
\
\'93What next! Let him talk! People talk, why hinder them? It makes it\
cheerful,\'94 Grushenka said crossly.\
\
\'93I\'92m not hindering them, _pani_,\'94 said the Pole in the wig, with a long\
look at Grushenka, and relapsing into dignified silence he sucked his pipe\
again.\
\
\'93No, no. The Polish gentleman spoke the truth.\'94 Kalganov got excited\
again, as though it were a question of vast import. \'93He\'92s never been in\
Poland, so how can he talk about it? I suppose you weren\'92t married in\
Poland, were you?\'94\
\
\'93No, in the Province of Smolensk. Only, a Uhlan had brought her to Russia\
before that, my future wife, with her mamma and her aunt, and another\
female relation with a grown\uc0\u8208 up son. He brought her straight from Poland\
and gave her up to me. He was a lieutenant in our regiment, a very nice\
young man. At first he meant to marry her himself. But he didn\'92t marry\
her, because she turned out to be lame.\'94\
\
\'93So you married a lame woman?\'94 cried Kalganov.\
\
\'93Yes. They both deceived me a little bit at the time, and concealed it. I\
thought she was hopping; she kept hopping.... I thought it was for fun.\'94\
\
\'93So pleased she was going to marry you!\'94 yelled Kalganov, in a ringing,\
childish voice.\
\
\'93Yes, so pleased. But it turned out to be quite a different cause.\
Afterwards, when we were married, after the wedding, that very evening,\
she confessed, and very touchingly asked forgiveness. \'91I once jumped over\
a puddle when I was a child,\'92 she said, \'91and injured my leg.\'92 He he!\'94\
\
Kalganov went off into the most childish laughter, almost falling on the\
sofa. Grushenka, too, laughed. Mitya was at the pinnacle of happiness.\
\
\'93Do you know, that\'92s the truth, he\'92s not lying now,\'94 exclaimed Kalganov,\
turning to Mitya; \'93and do you know, he\'92s been married twice; it\'92s his\
first wife he\'92s talking about. But his second wife, do you know, ran away,\
and is alive now.\'94\
\
\'93Is it possible?\'94 said Mitya, turning quickly to Maximov with an\
expression of the utmost astonishment.\
\
\'93Yes. She did run away. I\'92ve had that unpleasant experience,\'94 Maximov\
modestly assented, \'93with a _monsieur_. And what was worse, she\'92d had all\
my little property transferred to her beforehand. \'91You\'92re an educated\
man,\'92 she said to me. \'91You can always get your living.\'92 She settled my\
business with that. A venerable bishop once said to me: \'91One of your wives\
was lame, but the other was too light\uc0\u8208 footed.\'92 He he!\'94\
\
\'93Listen, listen!\'94 cried Kalganov, bubbling over, \'93if he\'92s telling lies\'97and\
he often is\'97he\'92s only doing it to amuse us all. There\'92s no harm in that,\
is there? You know, I sometimes like him. He\'92s awfully low, but it\'92s\
natural to him, eh? Don\'92t you think so? Some people are low from self\uc0\u8208 \
interest, but he\'92s simply so, from nature. Only fancy, he claims (he was\
arguing about it all the way yesterday) that Gogol wrote _Dead Souls_\
about him. Do you remember, there\'92s a landowner called Maximov in it, whom\
Nozdryov thrashed. He was charged, do you remember, \'91for inflicting bodily\
injury with rods on the landowner Maximov in a drunken condition.\'92 Would\
you believe it, he claims that he was that Maximov and that he was beaten!\
Now can it be so? Tchitchikov made his journey, at the very latest, at the\
beginning of the twenties, so that the dates don\'92t fit. He couldn\'92t have\
been thrashed then, he couldn\'92t, could he?\'94\
\
It was difficult to imagine what Kalganov was excited about, but his\
excitement was genuine. Mitya followed his lead without protest.\
\
\'93Well, but if they did thrash him!\'94 he cried, laughing.\
\
\'93It\'92s not that they thrashed me exactly, but what I mean is\'97\'94 put in\
Maximov.\
\
\'93What do you mean? Either they thrashed you or they didn\'92t.\'94\
\
\'93What o\'92clock is it, _panie_?\'94 the Pole, with the pipe, asked his tall\
friend, with a bored expression. The other shrugged his shoulders in\
reply. Neither of them had a watch.\
\
\'93Why not talk? Let other people talk. Mustn\'92t other people talk because\
you\'92re bored?\'94 Grushenka flew at him with evident intention of finding\
fault. Something seemed for the first time to flash upon Mitya\'92s mind.\
This time the Pole answered with unmistakable irritability.\
\
\'93_Pani_, I didn\'92t oppose it. I didn\'92t say anything.\'94\
\
\'93All right then. Come, tell us your story,\'94 Grushenka cried to Maximov.\
\'93Why are you all silent?\'94\
\
\'93There\'92s nothing to tell, it\'92s all so foolish,\'94 answered Maximov at once,\
with evident satisfaction, mincing a little. \'93Besides, all that\'92s by way\
of allegory in Gogol, for he\'92s made all the names have a meaning. Nozdryov\
was really called Nosov, and Kuvshinikov had quite a different name, he\
was called Shkvornev. Fenardi really was called Fenardi, only he wasn\'92t an\
Italian but a Russian, and Mamsel Fenardi was a pretty girl with her\
pretty little legs in tights, and she had a little short skirt with\
spangles, and she kept turning round and round, only not for four hours\
but for four minutes only, and she bewitched every one...\'94\
\
\'93But what were you beaten for?\'94 cried Kalganov.\
\
\'93For Piron!\'94 answered Maximov.\
\
\'93What Piron?\'94 cried Mitya.\
\
\'93The famous French writer, Piron. We were all drinking then, a big party\
of us, in a tavern at that very fair. They\'92d invited me, and first of all\
I began quoting epigrams. \'91Is that you, Boileau? What a funny get\uc0\u8208 up!\'92 and\
Boileau answers that he\'92s going to a masquerade, that is to the baths, he\
he! And they took it to themselves, so I made haste to repeat another,\
very sarcastic, well known to all educated people:\
\
\
    Yes, Sappho and Phaon are we!\
    But one grief is weighing on me.\
    You don\'92t know your way to the sea!\
\
\
They were still more offended and began abusing me in the most unseemly\
way for it. And as ill\uc0\u8208 luck would have it, to set things right, I began\
telling a very cultivated anecdote about Piron, how he was not accepted\
into the French Academy, and to revenge himself wrote his own epitaph:\
\
\
    Ci\uc0\u8208 g\'eet Piron qui ne fut rien,\
    Pas m\'eame acad\'e9micien.\
\
\
They seized me and thrashed me.\'94\
\
\'93But what for? What for?\'94\
\
\'93For my education. People can thrash a man for anything,\'94 Maximov\
concluded, briefly and sententiously.\
\
\'93Eh, that\'92s enough! That\'92s all stupid, I don\'92t want to listen. I thought\
it would be amusing,\'94 Grushenka cut them short, suddenly.\
\
Mitya started, and at once left off laughing. The tall Pole rose upon his\
feet, and with the haughty air of a man, bored and out of his element,\
began pacing from corner to corner of the room, his hands behind his back.\
\
\'93Ah, he can\'92t sit still,\'94 said Grushenka, looking at him contemptuously.\
Mitya began to feel anxious. He noticed besides, that the Pole on the sofa\
was looking at him with an irritable expression.\
\
\'93_Panie!_\'94 cried Mitya, \'93let\'92s drink! and the other _pan_, too! Let us\
drink.\'94\
\
In a flash he had pulled three glasses towards him, and filled them with\
champagne.\
\
\'93To Poland, _panovie_, I drink to your Poland!\'94 cried Mitya.\
\
\'93I shall be delighted, _panie_,\'94 said the Pole on the sofa, with dignity\
and affable condescension, and he took his glass.\
\
\'93And the other _pan_, what\'92s his name? Drink, most illustrious, take your\
glass!\'94 Mitya urged.\
\
\'93Pan Vrublevsky,\'94 put in the Pole on the sofa.\
\
Pan Vrublevsky came up to the table, swaying as he walked.\
\
\'93To Poland, _panovie!_\'94 cried Mitya, raising his glass. \'93Hurrah!\'94\
\
All three drank. Mitya seized the bottle and again poured out three\
glasses.\
\
\'93Now to Russia, _panovie_, and let us be brothers!\'94\
\
\'93Pour out some for us,\'94 said Grushenka; \'93I\'92ll drink to Russia, too!\'94\
\
\'93So will I,\'94 said Kalganov.\
\
\'93And I would, too ... to Russia, the old grandmother!\'94 tittered Maximov.\
\
\'93All! All!\'94 cried Mitya. \'93Trifon Borissovitch, some more bottles!\'94\
\
The other three bottles Mitya had brought with him were put on the table.\
Mitya filled the glasses.\
\
\'93To Russia! Hurrah!\'94 he shouted again. All drank the toast except the\
Poles, and Grushenka tossed off her whole glass at once. The Poles did not\
touch theirs.\
\
\'93How\'92s this, _panovie_?\'94 cried Mitya, \'93won\'92t you drink it?\'94\
\
Pan Vrublevsky took the glass, raised it and said with a resonant voice:\
\
\'93To Russia as she was before 1772.\'94\
\
\'93Come, that\'92s better!\'94 cried the other Pole, and they both emptied their\
glasses at once.\
\
\'93You\'92re fools, you _panovie_,\'94 broke suddenly from Mitya.\
\
\'93_Panie!_\'94 shouted both the Poles, menacingly, setting on Mitya like a\
couple of cocks. Pan Vrublevsky was specially furious.\
\
\'93Can one help loving one\'92s own country?\'94 he shouted.\
\
\'93Be silent! Don\'92t quarrel! I won\'92t have any quarreling!\'94 cried Grushenka\
imperiously, and she stamped her foot on the floor. Her face glowed, her\
eyes were shining. The effects of the glass she had just drunk were\
apparent. Mitya was terribly alarmed.\
\
\'93_Panovie_, forgive me! It was my fault, I\'92m sorry. Vrublevsky, _panie_\
Vrublevsky, I\'92m sorry.\'94\
\
\'93Hold your tongue, you, anyway! Sit down, you stupid!\'94 Grushenka scolded\
with angry annoyance.\
\
Every one sat down, all were silent, looking at one another.\
\
\'93Gentlemen, I was the cause of it all,\'94 Mitya began again, unable to make\
anything of Grushenka\'92s words. \'93Come, why are we sitting here? What shall\
we do ... to amuse ourselves again?\'94\
\
\'93Ach, it\'92s certainly anything but amusing!\'94 Kalganov mumbled lazily.\
\
\'93Let\'92s play faro again, as we did just now,\'94 Maximov tittered suddenly.\
\
\'93Faro? Splendid!\'94 cried Mitya. \'93If only the _panovie_\'97\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s lite, _panovie_,\'94 the Pole on the sofa responded, as it were\
unwillingly.\
\
\'93That\'92s true,\'94 assented Pan Vrublevsky.\
\
\'93Lite? What do you mean by \'91lite\'92?\'94 asked Grushenka.\
\
\'93Late, _pani_! \'91a late hour\'92 I mean,\'94 the Pole on the sofa explained.\
\
\'93It\'92s always late with them. They can never do anything!\'94 Grushenka almost\
shrieked in her anger. \'93They\'92re dull themselves, so they want others to be\
dull. Before you came, Mitya, they were just as silent and kept turning up\
their noses at me.\'94\
\
\'93My goddess!\'94 cried the Pole on the sofa, \'93I see you\'92re not well\uc0\u8208 disposed\
to me, that\'92s why I\'92m gloomy. I\'92m ready, _panie_,\'94 added he, addressing\
Mitya.\
\
\'93Begin, _panie_,\'94 Mitya assented, pulling his notes out of his pocket, and\
laying two hundred\uc0\u8208 rouble notes on the table. \'93I want to lose a lot to\
you. Take your cards. Make the bank.\'94\
\
\'93We\'92ll have cards from the landlord, _panie_,\'94 said the little Pole,\
gravely and emphatically.\
\
\'93That\'92s much the best way,\'94 chimed in Pan Vrublevsky.\
\
\'93From the landlord? Very good, I understand, let\'92s get them from him.\
Cards!\'94 Mitya shouted to the landlord.\
\
The landlord brought in a new, unopened pack, and informed Mitya that the\
girls were getting ready, and that the Jews with the cymbals would most\
likely be here soon; but the cart with the provisions had not yet arrived.\
Mitya jumped up from the table and ran into the next room to give orders,\
but only three girls had arrived, and Marya was not there yet. And he did\
not know himself what orders to give and why he had run out. He only told\
them to take out of the box the presents for the girls, the sweets, the\
toffee and the fondants. \'93And vodka for Andrey, vodka for Andrey!\'94 he\
cried in haste. \'93I was rude to Andrey!\'94\
\
Suddenly Maximov, who had followed him out, touched him on the shoulder.\
\
\'93Give me five roubles,\'94 he whispered to Mitya. \'93I\'92ll stake something at\
faro, too, he he!\'94\
\
\'93Capital! Splendid! Take ten, here!\'94\
\
Again he took all the notes out of his pocket and picked out one for ten\
roubles. \'93And if you lose that, come again, come again.\'94\
\
\'93Very good,\'94 Maximov whispered joyfully, and he ran back again. Mitya,\
too, returned, apologizing for having kept them waiting. The Poles had\
already sat down, and opened the pack. They looked much more amiable,\
almost cordial. The Pole on the sofa had lighted another pipe and was\
preparing to throw. He wore an air of solemnity.\
\
\'93To your places, gentlemen,\'94 cried Pan Vrublevsky.\
\
\'93No, I\'92m not going to play any more,\'94 observed Kalganov, \'93I\'92ve lost fifty\
roubles to them just now.\'94\
\
\'93The _pan_ had no luck, perhaps he\'92ll be lucky this time,\'94 the Pole on the\
sofa observed in his direction.\
\
\'93How much in the bank? To correspond?\'94 asked Mitya.\
\
\'93That\'92s according, _panie_, maybe a hundred, maybe two hundred, as much as\
you will stake.\'94\
\
\'93A million!\'94 laughed Mitya.\
\
\'93The Pan Captain has heard of Pan Podvysotsky, perhaps?\'94\
\
\'93What Podvysotsky?\'94\
\
\'93In Warsaw there was a bank and any one comes and stakes against it.\
Podvysotsky comes, sees a thousand gold pieces, stakes against the bank.\
The banker says, \'91_Panie_ Podvysotsky, are you laying down the gold, or\
must we trust to your honor?\'92 \'91To my honor, _panie_,\'92 says Podvysotsky.\
\'91So much the better.\'92 The banker throws the dice. Podvysotsky wins. \'91Take\
it, _panie_,\'92 says the banker, and pulling out the drawer he gives him a\
million. \'91Take it, _panie_, this is your gain.\'92 There was a million in the\
bank. \'91I didn\'92t know that,\'92 says Podvysotsky. \'91_Panie_ Podvysotsky,\'92 said\
the banker, \'91you pledged your honor and we pledged ours.\'92 Podvysotsky took\
the million.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s not true,\'94 said Kalganov.\
\
\'93_Panie_ Kalganov, in gentlemanly society one doesn\'92t say such things.\'94\
\
\'93As if a Polish gambler would give away a million!\'94 cried Mitya, but\
checked himself at once. \'93Forgive me, _panie_, it\'92s my fault again, he\
would, he would give away a million, for honor, for Polish honor. You see\
how I talk Polish, ha ha! Here, I stake ten roubles, the knave leads.\'94\
\
\'93And I put a rouble on the queen, the queen of hearts, the pretty little\
_panienotchka_, he he!\'94 laughed Maximov, pulling out his queen, and, as\
though trying to conceal it from every one, he moved right up and crossed\
himself hurriedly under the table. Mitya won. The rouble won, too.\
\
\'93A corner!\'94 cried Mitya.\
\
\'93I\'92ll bet another rouble, a \'91single\'92 stake,\'94 Maximov muttered gleefully,\
hugely delighted at having won a rouble.\
\
\'93Lost!\'94 shouted Mitya. \'93A \'91double\'92 on the seven!\'94\
\
The seven too was trumped.\
\
\'93Stop!\'94 cried Kalganov suddenly.\
\
\'93Double! Double!\'94 Mitya doubled his stakes, and each time he doubled the\
stake, the card he doubled was trumped by the Poles. The rouble stakes\
kept winning.\
\
\'93On the double!\'94 shouted Mitya furiously.\
\
\'93You\'92ve lost two hundred, _panie_. Will you stake another hundred?\'94 the\
Pole on the sofa inquired.\
\
\'93What? Lost two hundred already? Then another two hundred! All doubles!\'94\
\
And pulling his money out of his pocket, Mitya was about to fling two\
hundred roubles on the queen, but Kalganov covered it with his hand.\
\
\'93That\'92s enough!\'94 he shouted in his ringing voice.\
\
\'93What\'92s the matter?\'94 Mitya stared at him.\
\
\'93That\'92s enough! I don\'92t want you to play any more. Don\'92t!\'94\
\
\'93Why?\'94\
\
\'93Because I don\'92t. Hang it, come away. That\'92s why. I won\'92t let you go on\
playing.\'94\
\
Mitya gazed at him in astonishment.\
\
\'93Give it up, Mitya. He may be right. You\'92ve lost a lot as it is,\'94 said\
Grushenka, with a curious note in her voice. Both the Poles rose from\
their seats with a deeply offended air.\
\
\'93Are you joking, _panie_?\'94 said the short man, looking severely at\
Kalganov.\
\
\'93How dare you!\'94 Pan Vrublevsky, too, growled at Kalganov.\
\
\'93Don\'92t dare to shout like that,\'94 cried Grushenka. \'93Ah, you turkey\uc0\u8208 cocks!\'94\
\
Mitya looked at each of them in turn. But something in Grushenka\'92s face\
suddenly struck him, and at the same instant something new flashed into\
his mind\'97a strange new thought!\
\
\'93_Pani_ Agrippina,\'94 the little Pole was beginning, crimson with anger,\
when Mitya suddenly went up to him and slapped him on the shoulder.\
\
\'93Most illustrious, two words with you.\'94\
\
\'93What do you want?\'94\
\
\'93In the next room, I\'92ve two words to say to you, something pleasant, very\
pleasant. You\'92ll be glad to hear it.\'94\
\
The little _pan_ was taken aback and looked apprehensively at Mitya. He\
agreed at once, however, on condition that Pan Vrublevsky went with them.\
\
\'93The bodyguard? Let him come, and I want him, too. I must have him!\'94 cried\
Mitya. \'93March, _panovie_!\'94\
\
\'93Where are you going?\'94 asked Grushenka, anxiously.\
\
\'93We\'92ll be back in one moment,\'94 answered Mitya.\
\
There was a sort of boldness, a sudden confidence shining in his eyes. His\
face had looked very different when he entered the room an hour before.\
\
He led the Poles, not into the large room where the chorus of girls was\
assembling and the table was being laid, but into the bedroom on the\
right, where the trunks and packages were kept, and there were two large\
beds, with pyramids of cotton pillows on each. There was a lighted candle\
on a small deal table in the corner. The small man and Mitya sat down to\
this table, facing each other, while the huge Vrublevsky stood beside\
them, his hands behind his back. The Poles looked severe but were\
evidently inquisitive.\
\
\'93What can I do for you, _panie_?\'94 lisped the little Pole.\
\
\'93Well, look here, _panie_, I won\'92t keep you long. There\'92s money for you,\'94\
he pulled out his notes. \'93Would you like three thousand? Take it and go\
your way.\'94\
\
The Pole gazed open\uc0\u8208 eyed at Mitya, with a searching look.\
\
\'93Three thousand, _panie_?\'94 He exchanged glances with Vrublevsky.\
\
\'93Three, _panovie_, three! Listen, _panie_, I see you\'92re a sensible man.\
Take three thousand and go to the devil, and Vrublevsky with you\'97d\'92you\
hear? But, at once, this very minute, and for ever. You understand that,\
_panie_, for ever. Here\'92s the door, you go out of it. What have you got\
there, a great\uc0\u8208 coat, a fur coat? I\'92ll bring it out to you. They\'92ll get the\
horses out directly, and then\'97good\uc0\u8208 by, _panie_!\'94\
\
Mitya awaited an answer with assurance. He had no doubts. An expression of\
extraordinary resolution passed over the Pole\'92s face.\
\
\'93And the money, _panie_?\'94\
\
\'93The money, _panie_? Five hundred roubles I\'92ll give you this moment for\
the journey, and as a first installment, and two thousand five hundred to\uc0\u8208 \
morrow, in the town\'97I swear on my honor, I\'92ll get it, I\'92ll get it at any\
cost!\'94 cried Mitya.\
\
The Poles exchanged glances again. The short man\'92s face looked more\
forbidding.\
\
\'93Seven hundred, seven hundred, not five hundred, at once, this minute,\
cash down!\'94 Mitya added, feeling something wrong. \'93What\'92s the matter,\
_panie_? Don\'92t you trust me? I can\'92t give you the whole three thousand\
straight off. If I give it, you may come back to her to\uc0\u8208 morrow....\
Besides, I haven\'92t the three thousand with me. I\'92ve got it at home in the\
town,\'94 faltered Mitya, his spirit sinking at every word he uttered. \'93Upon\
my word, the money\'92s there, hidden.\'94\
\
In an instant an extraordinary sense of personal dignity showed itself in\
the little man\'92s face.\
\
\'93What next?\'94 he asked ironically. \'93For shame!\'94 and he spat on the floor.\
Pan Vrublevsky spat too.\
\
\'93You do that, _panie_,\'94 said Mitya, recognizing with despair that all was\
over, \'93because you hope to make more out of Grushenka? You\'92re a couple of\
capons, that\'92s what you are!\'94\
\
\'93This is a mortal insult!\'94 The little Pole turned as red as a crab, and he\
went out of the room, briskly, as though unwilling to hear another word.\
Vrublevsky swung out after him, and Mitya followed, confused and\
crestfallen. He was afraid of Grushenka, afraid that the _pan_ would at\
once raise an outcry. And so indeed he did. The Pole walked into the room\
and threw himself in a theatrical attitude before Grushenka.\
\
\'93_Pani_ Agrippina, I have received a mortal insult!\'94 he exclaimed. But\
Grushenka suddenly lost all patience, as though they had wounded her in\
the tenderest spot.\
\
\'93Speak Russian! Speak Russian!\'94 she cried, \'93not another word of Polish!\
You used to talk Russian. You can\'92t have forgotten it in five years.\'94\
\
She was red with passion.\
\
\'93_Pani_ Agrippina\'97\'94\
\
\'93My name\'92s Agrafena, Grushenka, speak Russian or I won\'92t listen!\'94\
\
The Pole gasped with offended dignity, and quickly and pompously delivered\
himself in broken Russian:\
\
\'93_Pani_ Agrafena, I came here to forget the past and forgive it, to forget\
all that has happened till to\uc0\u8208 day\'97\'94\
\
\'93Forgive? Came here to forgive me?\'94 Grushenka cut him short, jumping up\
from her seat.\
\
\'93Just so, _pani_, I\'92m not pusillanimous, I\'92m magnanimous. But I was\
astounded when I saw your lovers. Pan Mitya offered me three thousand, in\
the other room to depart. I spat in the _pan\'92s_ face.\'94\
\
\'93What? He offered you money for me?\'94 cried Grushenka, hysterically. \'93Is it\
true, Mitya? How dare you? Am I for sale?\'94\
\
\'93_Panie, panie!_\'94 yelled Mitya, \'93she\'92s pure and shining, and I have never\
been her lover! That\'92s a lie....\'94\
\
\'93How dare you defend me to him?\'94 shrieked Grushenka. \'93It wasn\'92t virtue\
kept me pure, and it wasn\'92t that I was afraid of Kuzma, but that I might\
hold up my head when I met him, and tell him he\'92s a scoundrel. And he did\
actually refuse the money?\'94\
\
\'93He took it! He took it!\'94 cried Mitya; \'93only he wanted to get the whole\
three thousand at once, and I could only give him seven hundred straight\
off.\'94\
\
\'93I see: he heard I had money, and came here to marry me!\'94\
\
\'93_Pani_ Agrippina!\'94 cried the little Pole. \'93I\'92m\'97a knight, I\'92m\'97a nobleman,\
and not a _lajdak_. I came here to make you my wife and I find you a\
different woman, perverse and shameless.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, go back where you came from! I\'92ll tell them to turn you out and\
you\'92ll be turned out,\'94 cried Grushenka, furious. \'93I\'92ve been a fool, a\
fool, to have been miserable these five years! And it wasn\'92t for his sake,\
it was my anger made me miserable. And this isn\'92t he at all! Was he like\
this? It might be his father! Where did you get your wig from? He was a\
falcon, but this is a gander. He used to laugh and sing to me.... And I\'92ve\
been crying for five years, damned fool, abject, shameless I was!\'94\
\
She sank back in her low chair and hid her face in her hands. At that\
instant the chorus of Mokroe began singing in the room on the left\'97a\
rollicking dance song.\
\
\'93A regular Sodom!\'94 Vrublevsky roared suddenly. \'93Landlord, send the\
shameless hussies away!\'94\
\
The landlord, who had been for some time past inquisitively peeping in at\
the door, hearing shouts and guessing that his guests were quarreling, at\
once entered the room.\
\
\'93What are you shouting for? D\'92you want to split your throat?\'94 he said,\
addressing Vrublevsky, with surprising rudeness.\
\
\'93Animal!\'94 bellowed Pan Vrublevsky.\
\
\'93Animal? And what sort of cards were you playing with just now? I gave you\
a pack and you hid it. You played with marked cards! I could send you to\
Siberia for playing with false cards, d\'92you know that, for it\'92s just the\
same as false banknotes....\'94\
\
And going up to the sofa he thrust his fingers between the sofa back and\
the cushion, and pulled out an unopened pack of cards.\
\
\'93Here\'92s my pack unopened!\'94\
\
He held it up and showed it to all in the room. \'93From where I stood I saw\
him slip my pack away, and put his in place of it\'97you\'92re a cheat and not a\
gentleman!\'94\
\
\'93And I twice saw the _pan_ change a card!\'94 cried Kalganov.\
\
\'93How shameful! How shameful!\'94 exclaimed Grushenka, clasping her hands, and\
blushing for genuine shame. \'93Good Lord, he\'92s come to that!\'94\
\
\'93I thought so, too!\'94 said Mitya. But before he had uttered the words,\
Vrublevsky, with a confused and infuriated face, shook his fist at\
Grushenka, shouting:\
\
\'93You low harlot!\'94\
\
Mitya flew at him at once, clutched him in both hands, lifted him in the\
air, and in one instant had carried him into the room on the right, from\
which they had just come.\
\
\'93I\'92ve laid him on the floor, there,\'94 he announced, returning at once,\
gasping with excitement. \'93He\'92s struggling, the scoundrel! But he won\'92t\
come back, no fear of that!...\'94\
\
He closed one half of the folding doors, and holding the other ajar called\
out to the little Pole:\
\
\'93Most illustrious, will you be pleased to retire as well?\'94\
\
\'93My dear Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94 said Trifon Borissovitch, \'93make them give\
you back the money you lost. It\'92s as good as stolen from you.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t want my fifty roubles back,\'94 Kalganov declared suddenly.\
\
\'93I don\'92t want my two hundred, either,\'94 cried Mitya, \'93I wouldn\'92t take it\
for anything! Let him keep it as a consolation.\'94\
\
\'93Bravo, Mitya! You\'92re a trump, Mitya!\'94 cried Grushenka, and there was a\
note of fierce anger in the exclamation.\
\
The little _pan_, crimson with fury but still mindful of his dignity, was\
making for the door, but he stopped short and said suddenly, addressing\
Grushenka:\
\
\'93_Pani_, if you want to come with me, come. If not, good\uc0\u8208 by.\'94\
\
And swelling with indignation and importance he went to the door. This was\
a man of character: he had so good an opinion of himself that after all\
that had passed, he still expected that she would marry him. Mitya slammed\
the door after him.\
\
\'93Lock it,\'94 said Kalganov. But the key clicked on the other side, they had\
locked it from within.\
\
\'93That\'92s capital!\'94 exclaimed Grushenka relentlessly. \'93Serve them right!\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter VIII. Delirium\
\
\
What followed was almost an orgy, a feast to which all were welcome.\
Grushenka was the first to call for wine.\
\
\'93I want to drink. I want to be quite drunk, as we were before. Do you\
remember, Mitya, do you remember how we made friends here last time!\'94\
\
Mitya himself was almost delirious, feeling that his happiness was at\
hand. But Grushenka was continually sending him away from her.\
\
\'93Go and enjoy yourself. Tell them to dance, to make merry, \'91let the stove\
and cottage dance\'92; as we had it last time,\'94 she kept exclaiming. She was\
tremendously excited. And Mitya hastened to obey her. The chorus were in\
the next room. The room in which they had been sitting till that moment\
was too small, and was divided in two by cotton curtains, behind which was\
a huge bed with a puffy feather mattress and a pyramid of cotton pillows.\
In the four rooms for visitors there were beds. Grushenka settled herself\
just at the door. Mitya set an easy chair for her. She had sat in the same\
place to watch the dancing and singing \'93the time before,\'94 when they had\
made merry there. All the girls who had come had been there then; the\
Jewish band with fiddles and zithers had come, too, and at last the long\
expected cart had arrived with the wines and provisions.\
\
Mitya bustled about. All sorts of people began coming into the room to\
look on, peasants and their women, who had been roused from sleep and\
attracted by the hopes of another marvelous entertainment such as they had\
enjoyed a month before. Mitya remembered their faces, greeting and\
embracing every one he knew. He uncorked bottles and poured out wine for\
every one who presented himself. Only the girls were very eager for the\
champagne. The men preferred rum, brandy, and, above all, hot punch. Mitya\
had chocolate made for all the girls, and ordered that three samovars\
should be kept boiling all night to provide tea and punch for everyone to\
help himself.\
\
An absurd chaotic confusion followed, but Mitya was in his natural\
element, and the more foolish it became, the more his spirits rose. If the\
peasants had asked him for money at that moment, he would have pulled out\
his notes and given them away right and left. This was probably why the\
landlord, Trifon Borissovitch, kept hovering about Mitya to protect him.\
He seemed to have given up all idea of going to bed that night; but he\
drank little, only one glass of punch, and kept a sharp look\uc0\u8208 out on\
Mitya\'92s interests after his own fashion. He intervened in the nick of\
time, civilly and obsequiously persuading Mitya not to give away \'93cigars\
and Rhine wine,\'94 and, above all, money to the peasants as he had done\
before. He was very indignant, too, at the peasant girls drinking liqueur,\
and eating sweets.\
\
\'93They\'92re a lousy lot, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94 he said. \'93I\'92d give them a\
kick, every one of them, and they\'92d take it as an honor\'97that\'92s all they\'92re\
worth!\'94\
\
Mitya remembered Andrey again, and ordered punch to be sent out to him. \'93I\
was rude to him just now,\'94 he repeated with a sinking, softened voice.\
Kalganov did not want to drink, and at first did not care for the girls\'92\
singing; but after he had drunk a couple of glasses of champagne he became\
extraordinarily lively, strolling about the room, laughing and praising\
the music and the songs, admiring every one and everything. Maximov,\
blissfully drunk, never left his side. Grushenka, too, was beginning to\
get drunk. Pointing to Kalganov, she said to Mitya:\
\
\'93What a dear, charming boy he is!\'94\
\
And Mitya, delighted, ran to kiss Kalganov and Maximov. Oh, great were his\
hopes! She had said nothing yet, and seemed, indeed, purposely to refrain\
from speaking. But she looked at him from time to time with caressing and\
passionate eyes. At last she suddenly gripped his hand and drew him\
vigorously to her. She was sitting at the moment in the low chair by the\
door.\
\
\'93How was it you came just now, eh? Have you walked in!... I was\
frightened. So you wanted to give me up to him, did you? Did you really\
want to?\'94\
\
\'93I didn\'92t want to spoil your happiness!\'94 Mitya faltered blissfully. But\
she did not need his answer.\
\
\'93Well, go and enjoy yourself ...\'94 she sent him away once more. \'93Don\'92t cry,\
I\'92ll call you back again.\'94\
\
He would run away, and she listened to the singing and looked at the\
dancing, though her eyes followed him wherever he went. But in another\
quarter of an hour she would call him once more and again he would run\
back to her.\
\
\'93Come, sit beside me, tell me, how did you hear about me, and my coming\
here yesterday? From whom did you first hear it?\'94\
\
And Mitya began telling her all about it, disconnectedly, incoherently,\
feverishly. He spoke strangely, often frowning, and stopping abruptly.\
\
\'93What are you frowning at?\'94 she asked.\
\
\'93Nothing.... I left a man ill there. I\'92d give ten years of my life for him\
to get well, to know he was all right!\'94\
\
\'93Well, never mind him, if he\'92s ill. So you meant to shoot yourself to\uc0\u8208 \
morrow! What a silly boy! What for? I like such reckless fellows as you,\'94\
she lisped, with a rather halting tongue. \'93So you would go any length for\
me, eh? Did you really mean to shoot yourself to\uc0\u8208 morrow, you stupid? No,\
wait a little. To\uc0\u8208 morrow I may have something to say to you.... I won\'92t\
say it to\uc0\u8208 day, but to\u8208 morrow. You\'92d like it to be to\u8208 day? No, I don\'92t want\
to to\uc0\u8208 day. Come, go along now, go and amuse yourself.\'94\
\
Once, however, she called him, as it were, puzzled and uneasy.\
\
\'93Why are you sad? I see you\'92re sad.... Yes, I see it,\'94 she added, looking\
intently into his eyes. \'93Though you keep kissing the peasants and\
shouting, I see something. No, be merry. I\'92m merry; you be merry, too....\
I love somebody here. Guess who it is. Ah, look, my boy has fallen asleep,\
poor dear, he\'92s drunk.\'94\
\
She meant Kalganov. He was, in fact, drunk, and had dropped asleep for a\
moment, sitting on the sofa. But he was not merely drowsy from drink; he\
felt suddenly dejected, or, as he said, \'93bored.\'94 He was intensely\
depressed by the girls\'92 songs, which, as the drinking went on, gradually\
became coarse and more reckless. And the dances were as bad. Two girls\
dressed up as bears, and a lively girl, called Stepanida, with a stick in\
her hand, acted the part of keeper, and began to \'93show them.\'94\
\
\'93Look alive, Marya, or you\'92ll get the stick!\'94\
\
The bears rolled on the ground at last in the most unseemly fashion, amid\
roars of laughter from the closely\uc0\u8208 packed crowd of men and women.\
\
\'93Well, let them! Let them!\'94 said Grushenka sententiously, with an ecstatic\
expression on her face. \'93When they do get a day to enjoy themselves, why\
shouldn\'92t folks be happy?\'94\
\
Kalganov looked as though he had been besmirched with dirt.\
\
\'93It\'92s swinish, all this peasant foolery,\'94 he murmured, moving away; \'93it\'92s\
the game they play when it\'92s light all night in summer.\'94\
\
He particularly disliked one \'93new\'94 song to a jaunty dance\uc0\u8208 tune. It\
described how a gentleman came and tried his luck with the girls, to see\
whether they would love him:\
\
\
    The master came to try the girls:\
    Would they love him, would they not?\
\
\
But the girls could not love the master:\
\
\
    He would beat me cruelly\
    And such love won\'92t do for me.\
\
\
Then a gypsy comes along and he, too, tries:\
\
\
    The gypsy came to try the girls:\
    Would they love him, would they not?\
\
\
But they couldn\'92t love the gypsy either:\
\
\
    He would be a thief, I fear,\
    And would cause me many a tear.\
\
\
And many more men come to try their luck, among them a soldier:\
\
\
    The soldier came to try the girls:\
    Would they love him, would they not?\
\
\
But the soldier is rejected with contempt, in two indecent lines, sung\
with absolute frankness and producing a furore in the audience. The song\
ends with a merchant:\
\
\
    The merchant came to try the girls:\
    Would they love him, would they not?\
\
\
And it appears that he wins their love because:\
\
\
    The merchant will make gold for me\
    And his queen I\'92ll gladly be.\
\
\
Kalvanov was positively indignant.\
\
\'93That\'92s just a song of yesterday,\'94 he said aloud. \'93Who writes such things\
for them? They might just as well have had a railwayman or a Jew come to\
try his luck with the girls; they\'92d have carried all before them.\'94\
\
And, almost as though it were a personal affront, he declared, on the\
spot, that he was bored, sat down on the sofa and immediately fell asleep.\
His pretty little face looked rather pale, as it fell back on the sofa\
cushion.\
\
\'93Look how pretty he is,\'94 said Grushenka, taking Mitya up to him. \'93I was\
combing his hair just now; his hair\'92s like flax, and so thick....\'94\
\
And, bending over him tenderly, she kissed his forehead. Kalganov\
instantly opened his eyes, looked at her, stood up, and with the most\
anxious air inquired where was Maximov?\
\
\'93So that\'92s who it is you want.\'94 Grushenka laughed. \'93Stay with me a minute.\
Mitya, run and find his Maximov.\'94\
\
Maximov, it appeared, could not tear himself away from the girls, only\
running away from time to time to pour himself out a glass of liqueur. He\
had drunk two cups of chocolate. His face was red, and his nose was\
crimson; his eyes were moist and mawkishly sweet. He ran up and announced\
that he was going to dance the \'93saboti\'e8re.\'94\
\
\'93They taught me all those well\uc0\u8208 bred, aristocratic dances when I was\
little....\'94\
\
\'93Go, go with him, Mitya, and I\'92ll watch from here how he dances,\'94 said\
Grushenka.\
\
\'93No, no, I\'92m coming to look on, too,\'94 exclaimed Kalganov, brushing aside\
in the most na\'efve way Grushenka\'92s offer to sit with him. They all went to\
look on. Maximov danced his dance. But it roused no great admiration in\
any one but Mitya. It consisted of nothing but skipping and hopping,\
kicking up the feet, and at every skip Maximov slapped the upturned sole\
of his foot. Kalganov did not like it at all, but Mitya kissed the dancer.\
\
\'93Thanks. You\'92re tired perhaps? What are you looking for here? Would you\
like some sweets? A cigar, perhaps?\'94\
\
\'93A cigarette.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t you want a drink?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll just have a liqueur.... Have you any chocolates?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, there\'92s a heap of them on the table there. Choose one, my dear\
soul!\'94\
\
\'93I like one with vanilla ... for old people. He he!\'94\
\
\'93No, brother, we\'92ve none of that special sort.\'94\
\
\'93I say,\'94 the old man bent down to whisper in Mitya\'92s ear. \'93That girl\
there, little Marya, he he! How would it be if you were to help me make\
friends with her?\'94\
\
\'93So that\'92s what you\'92re after! No, brother, that won\'92t do!\'94\
\
\'93I\'92d do no harm to any one,\'94 Maximov muttered disconsolately.\
\
\'93Oh, all right, all right. They only come here to dance and sing, you\
know, brother. But damn it all, wait a bit!... Eat and drink and be merry,\
meanwhile. Don\'92t you want money?\'94\
\
\'93Later on, perhaps,\'94 smiled Maximov.\
\
\'93All right, all right....\'94\
\
Mitya\'92s head was burning. He went outside to the wooden balcony which ran\
round the whole building on the inner side, overlooking the courtyard. The\
fresh air revived him. He stood alone in a dark corner, and suddenly\
clutched his head in both hands. His scattered thoughts came together; his\
sensations blended into a whole and threw a sudden light into his mind. A\
fearful and terrible light! \'93If I\'92m to shoot myself, why not now?\'94 passed\
through his mind. \'93Why not go for the pistols, bring them here, and here,\
in this dark dirty corner, make an end?\'94 Almost a minute he stood,\
undecided. A few hours earlier, when he had been dashing here, he was\
pursued by disgrace, by the theft he had committed, and that blood, that\
blood!... But yet it was easier for him then. Then everything was over: he\
had lost her, given her up. She was gone, for him\'97oh, then his death\
sentence had been easier for him; at least it had seemed necessary,\
inevitable, for what had he to stay on earth for?\
\
But now? Was it the same as then? Now one phantom, one terror at least was\
at an end: that first, rightful lover, that fateful figure had vanished,\
leaving no trace. The terrible phantom had turned into something so small,\
so comic; it had been carried into the bedroom and locked in. It would\
never return. She was ashamed, and from her eyes he could see now whom she\
loved. Now he had everything to make life happy ... but he could not go on\
living, he could not; oh, damnation! \'93O God! restore to life the man I\
knocked down at the fence! Let this fearful cup pass from me! Lord, thou\
hast wrought miracles for such sinners as me! But what, what if the old\
man\'92s alive? Oh, then the shame of the other disgrace I would wipe away. I\
would restore the stolen money. I\'92d give it back; I\'92d get it somehow....\
No trace of that shame will remain except in my heart for ever! But no,\
no; oh, impossible cowardly dreams! Oh, damnation!\'94\
\
Yet there was a ray of light and hope in his darkness. He jumped up and\
ran back to the room\'97to her, to her, his queen for ever! Was not one\
moment of her love worth all the rest of life, even in the agonies of\
disgrace? This wild question clutched at his heart. \'93To her, to her alone,\
to see her, to hear her, to think of nothing, to forget everything, if\
only for that night, for an hour, for a moment!\'94 Just as he turned from\
the balcony into the passage, he came upon the landlord, Trifon\
Borissovitch. He thought he looked gloomy and worried, and fancied he had\
come to find him.\
\
\'93What is it, Trifon Borissovitch? are you looking for me?\'94\
\
\'93No, sir.\'94 The landlord seemed disconcerted. \'93Why should I be looking for\
you? Where have you been?\'94\
\
\'93Why do you look so glum? You\'92re not angry, are you? Wait a bit, you shall\
soon get to bed.... What\'92s the time?\'94\
\
\'93It\'92ll be three o\'92clock. Past three, it must be.\'94\
\
\'93We\'92ll leave off soon. We\'92ll leave off.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t mention it; it doesn\'92t matter. Keep it up as long as you like....\'94\
\
\'93What\'92s the matter with him?\'94 Mitya wondered for an instant, and he ran\
back to the room where the girls were dancing. But she was not there. She\
was not in the blue room either; there was no one but Kalganov asleep on\
the sofa. Mitya peeped behind the curtain\'97she was there. She was sitting\
in the corner, on a trunk. Bent forward, with her head and arms on the bed\
close by, she was crying bitterly, doing her utmost to stifle her sobs\
that she might not be heard. Seeing Mitya, she beckoned him to her, and\
when he ran to her, she grasped his hand tightly.\
\
\'93Mitya, Mitya, I loved him, you know. How I have loved him these five\
years, all that time! Did I love him or only my own anger? No, him, him!\
It\'92s a lie that it was my anger I loved and not him. Mitya, I was only\
seventeen then; he was so kind to me, so merry; he used to sing to me....\
Or so it seemed to a silly girl like me.... And now, O Lord, it\'92s not the\
same man. Even his face is not the same; he\'92s different altogether. I\
shouldn\'92t have known him. I drove here with Timofey, and all the way I was\
thinking how I should meet him, what I should say to him, how we should\
look at one another. My soul was faint, and all of a sudden it was just as\
though he had emptied a pail of dirty water over me. He talked to me like\
a schoolmaster, all so grave and learned; he met me so solemnly that I was\
struck dumb. I couldn\'92t get a word in. At first I thought he was ashamed\
to talk before his great big Pole. I sat staring at him and wondering why\
I couldn\'92t say a word to him now. It must have been his wife that ruined\
him; you know he threw me up to get married. She must have changed him\
like that. Mitya, how shameful it is! Oh, Mitya, I\'92m ashamed, I\'92m ashamed\
for all my life. Curse it, curse it, curse those five years!\'94\
\
And again she burst into tears, but clung tight to Mitya\'92s hand and did\
not let it go.\
\
\'93Mitya, darling, stay, don\'92t go away. I want to say one word to you,\'94 she\
whispered, and suddenly raised her face to him. \'93Listen, tell me who it is\
I love? I love one man here. Who is that man? That\'92s what you must tell\
me.\'94\
\
A smile lighted up her face that was swollen with weeping, and her eyes\
shone in the half darkness.\
\
\'93A falcon flew in, and my heart sank. \'91Fool! that\'92s the man you love!\'92\
That was what my heart whispered to me at once. You came in and all grew\
bright. What\'92s he afraid of? I wondered. For you were frightened; you\
couldn\'92t speak. It\'92s not them he\'92s afraid of\'97could you be frightened of\
any one? It\'92s me he\'92s afraid of, I thought, only me. So Fenya told you,\
you little stupid, how I called to Alyosha out of the window that I\'92d\
loved Mityenka for one hour, and that I was going now to love ... another.\
Mitya, Mitya, how could I be such a fool as to think I could love any one\
after you? Do you forgive me, Mitya? Do you forgive me or not? Do you love\
me? Do you love me?\'94 She jumped up and held him with both hands on his\
shoulders. Mitya, dumb with rapture, gazed into her eyes, at her face, at\
her smile, and suddenly clasped her tightly in his arms and kissed her\
passionately.\
\
\'93You will forgive me for having tormented you? It was through spite I\
tormented you all. It was for spite I drove the old man out of his\
mind.... Do you remember how you drank at my house one day and broke the\
wine\uc0\u8208 glass? I remembered that and I broke a glass to\u8208 day and drank \'91to my\
vile heart.\'92 Mitya, my falcon, why don\'92t you kiss me? He kissed me once,\
and now he draws back and looks and listens. Why listen to me? Kiss me,\
kiss me hard, that\'92s right. If you love, well, then, love! I\'92ll be your\
slave now, your slave for the rest of my life. It\'92s sweet to be a slave.\
Kiss me! Beat me, ill\uc0\u8208 treat me, do what you will with me.... And I do\
deserve to suffer. Stay, wait, afterwards, I won\'92t have that....\'94 she\
suddenly thrust him away. \'93Go along, Mitya, I\'92ll come and have some wine,\
I want to be drunk, I\'92m going to get drunk and dance; I must, I must!\'94 She\
tore herself away from him and disappeared behind the curtain. Mitya\
followed like a drunken man.\
\
\'93Yes, come what may\'97whatever may happen now, for one minute I\'92d give the\
whole world,\'94 he thought. Grushenka did, in fact, toss off a whole glass\
of champagne at one gulp, and became at once very tipsy. She sat down in\
the same chair as before, with a blissful smile on her face. Her cheeks\
were glowing, her lips were burning, her flashing eyes were moist; there\
was passionate appeal in her eyes. Even Kalganov felt a stir at the heart\
and went up to her.\
\
\'93Did you feel how I kissed you when you were asleep just now?\'94 she said\
thickly. \'93I\'92m drunk now, that\'92s what it is.... And aren\'92t you drunk? And\
why isn\'92t Mitya drinking? Why don\'92t you drink, Mitya? I\'92m drunk, and you\
don\'92t drink....\'94\
\
\'93I am drunk! I\'92m drunk as it is ... drunk with you ... and now I\'92ll be\
drunk with wine, too.\'94\
\
He drank off another glass, and\'97he thought it strange himself\'97that glass\
made him completely drunk. He was suddenly drunk, although till that\
moment he had been quite sober, he remembered that. From that moment\
everything whirled about him, as though he were delirious. He walked,\
laughed, talked to everybody, without knowing what he was doing. Only one\
persistent burning sensation made itself felt continually, \'93like a red\uc0\u8208 hot\
coal in his heart,\'94 he said afterwards. He went up to her, sat beside her,\
gazed at her, listened to her.... She became very talkative, kept calling\
every one to her, and beckoned to different girls out of the chorus. When\
the girl came up, she either kissed her, or made the sign of the cross\
over her. In another minute she might have cried. She was greatly amused\
by the \'93little old man,\'94 as she called Maximov. He ran up every minute to\
kiss her hands, \'93each little finger,\'94 and finally he danced another dance\
to an old song, which he sang himself. He danced with special vigor to the\
refrain:\
\
\
    The little pig says\'97umph! umph! umph!\
    The little calf says\'97moo, moo, moo,\
    The little duck says\'97quack, quack, quack,\
    The little goose says\'97ga, ga, ga.\
    The hen goes strutting through the porch;\
    Troo\uc0\u8208 roo\u8208 roo\u8208 roo\u8208 roo, she\'92ll say,\
    Troo\uc0\u8208 roo\u8208 roo\u8208 roo\u8208 roo, she\'92ll say!\
\
\
\'93Give him something, Mitya,\'94 said Grushenka. \'93Give him a present, he\'92s\
poor, you know. Ah, the poor, the insulted!... Do you know, Mitya, I shall\
go into a nunnery. No, I really shall one day, Alyosha said something to\
me to\uc0\u8208 day that I shall remember all my life.... Yes.... But to\u8208 day let us\
dance. To\uc0\u8208 morrow to the nunnery, but to\u8208 day we\'92ll dance. I want to play\
to\uc0\u8208 day, good people, and what of it? God will forgive us. If I were God,\
I\'92d forgive every one: \'91My dear sinners, from this day forth I forgive\
you.\'92 I\'92m going to beg forgiveness: \'91Forgive me, good people, a silly\
wench.\'92 I\'92m a beast, that\'92s what I am. But I want to pray. I gave a little\
onion. Wicked as I\'92ve been, I want to pray. Mitya, let them dance, don\'92t\
stop them. Every one in the world is good. Every one\'97even the worst of\
them. The world\'92s a nice place. Though we\'92re bad the world\'92s all right.\
We\'92re good and bad, good and bad.... Come, tell me, I\'92ve something to ask\
you: come here every one, and I\'92ll ask you: Why am I so good? You know I\
am good. I\'92m very good.... Come, why am I so good?\'94\
\
So Grushenka babbled on, getting more and more drunk. At last she\
announced that she was going to dance, too. She got up from her chair,\
staggering. \'93Mitya, don\'92t give me any more wine\'97if I ask you, don\'92t give\
it to me. Wine doesn\'92t give peace. Everything\'92s going round, the stove,\
and everything. I want to dance. Let every one see how I dance ... let\
them see how beautifully I dance....\'94\
\
She really meant it. She pulled a white cambric handkerchief out of her\
pocket, and took it by one corner in her right hand, to wave it in the\
dance. Mitya ran to and fro, the girls were quiet, and got ready to break\
into a dancing song at the first signal. Maximov, hearing that Grushenka\
wanted to dance, squealed with delight, and ran skipping about in front of\
her, humming:\
\
\
    With legs so slim and sides so trim\
    And its little tail curled tight.\
\
\
But Grushenka waved her handkerchief at him and drove him away.\
\
\'93Sh\uc0\u8208 h! Mitya, why don\'92t they come? Let every one come ... to look on. Call\
them in, too, that were locked in.... Why did you lock them in? Tell them\
I\'92m going to dance. Let them look on, too....\'94\
\
Mitya walked with a drunken swagger to the locked door, and began knocking\
to the Poles with his fist.\
\
\'93Hi, you ... Podvysotskys! Come, she\'92s going to dance. She calls you.\'94\
\
\'93_Lajdak!_\'94 one of the Poles shouted in reply.\
\
\'93You\'92re a _lajdak_ yourself! You\'92re a little scoundrel, that\'92s what you\
are.\'94\
\
\'93Leave off laughing at Poland,\'94 said Kalganov sententiously. He too was\
drunk.\
\
\'93Be quiet, boy! If I call him a scoundrel, it doesn\'92t mean that I called\
all Poland so. One _lajdak_ doesn\'92t make a Poland. Be quiet, my pretty\
boy, eat a sweetmeat.\'94\
\
\'93Ach, what fellows! As though they were not men. Why won\'92t they make\
friends?\'94 said Grushenka, and went forward to dance. The chorus broke into\
\'93Ah, my porch, my new porch!\'94 Grushenka flung back her head, half opened\
her lips, smiled, waved her handkerchief, and suddenly, with a violent\
lurch, stood still in the middle of the room, looking bewildered.\
\
\'93I\'92m weak....\'94 she said in an exhausted voice. \'93Forgive me.... I\'92m weak, I\
can\'92t.... I\'92m sorry.\'94\
\
She bowed to the chorus, and then began bowing in all directions.\
\
\'93I\'92m sorry.... Forgive me....\'94\
\
\'93The lady\'92s been drinking. The pretty lady has been drinking,\'94 voices were\
heard saying.\
\
\'93The lady\'92s drunk too much,\'94 Maximov explained to the girls, giggling.\
\
\'93Mitya, lead me away ... take me,\'94 said Grushenka helplessly. Mitya\
pounced on her, snatched her up in his arms, and carried the precious\
burden through the curtains.\
\
\'93Well, now I\'92ll go,\'94 thought Kalganov, and walking out of the blue room,\
he closed the two halves of the door after him. But the orgy in the larger\
room went on and grew louder and louder. Mitya laid Grushenka on the bed\
and kissed her on the lips.\
\
\'93Don\'92t touch me....\'94 she faltered, in an imploring voice. \'93Don\'92t touch me,\
till I\'92m yours.... I\'92ve told you I\'92m yours, but don\'92t touch me ... spare\
me.... With them here, with them close, you mustn\'92t. He\'92s here. It\'92s nasty\
here....\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll obey you! I won\'92t think of it ... I worship you!\'94 muttered Mitya.\
\'93Yes, it\'92s nasty here, it\'92s abominable.\'94\
\
And still holding her in his arms, he sank on his knees by the bedside.\
\
\'93I know, though you\'92re a brute, you\'92re generous,\'94 Grushenka articulated\
with difficulty. \'93It must be honorable ... it shall be honorable for the\
future ... and let us be honest, let us be good, not brutes, but good ...\
take me away, take me far away, do you hear? I don\'92t want it to be here,\
but far, far away....\'94\
\
\'93Oh, yes, yes, it must be!\'94 said Mitya, pressing her in his arms. \'93I\'92ll\
take you and we\'92ll fly away.... Oh, I\'92d give my whole life for one year\
only to know about that blood!\'94\
\
\'93What blood?\'94 asked Grushenka, bewildered.\
\
\'93Nothing,\'94 muttered Mitya, through his teeth. \'93Grusha, you wanted to be\
honest, but I\'92m a thief. But I\'92ve stolen money from Katya.... Disgrace, a\
disgrace!\'94\
\
\'93From Katya, from that young lady? No, you didn\'92t steal it. Give it her\
back, take it from me.... Why make a fuss? Now everything of mine is\
yours. What does money matter? We shall waste it anyway.... Folks like us\
are bound to waste money. But we\'92d better go and work the land. I want to\
dig the earth with my own hands. We must work, do you hear? Alyosha said\
so. I won\'92t be your mistress, I\'92ll be faithful to you, I\'92ll be your slave,\
I\'92ll work for you. We\'92ll go to the young lady and bow down to her\
together, so that she may forgive us, and then we\'92ll go away. And if she\
won\'92t forgive us, we\'92ll go, anyway. Take her her money and love me....\
Don\'92t love her.... Don\'92t love her any more. If you love her, I shall\
strangle her.... I\'92ll put out both her eyes with a needle....\'94\
\
\'93I love you. I love only you. I\'92ll love you in Siberia....\'94\
\
\'93Why Siberia? Never mind, Siberia, if you like. I don\'92t care ... we\'92ll\
work ... there\'92s snow in Siberia.... I love driving in the snow ... and\
must have bells.... Do you hear, there\'92s a bell ringing? Where is that\
bell ringing? There are people coming.... Now it\'92s stopped.\'94\
\
She closed her eyes, exhausted, and suddenly fell asleep for an instant.\
There had certainly been the sound of a bell in the distance, but the\
ringing had ceased. Mitya let his head sink on her breast. He did not\
notice that the bell had ceased ringing, nor did he notice that the songs\
had ceased, and that instead of singing and drunken clamor there was\
absolute stillness in the house. Grushenka opened her eyes.\
\
\'93What\'92s the matter? Was I asleep? Yes ... a bell ... I\'92ve been asleep and\
dreamt I was driving over the snow with bells, and I dozed. I was with\
some one I loved, with you. And far, far away. I was holding you and\
kissing you, nestling close to you. I was cold, and the snow glistened....\
You know how the snow glistens at night when the moon shines. It was as\
though I was not on earth. I woke up, and my dear one is close to me. How\
sweet that is!...\'94\
\
\'93Close to you,\'94 murmured Mitya, kissing her dress, her bosom, her hands.\
And suddenly he had a strange fancy: it seemed to him that she was looking\
straight before her, not at him, not into his face, but over his head,\
with an intent, almost uncanny fixity. An expression of wonder, almost of\
alarm, came suddenly into her face.\
\
\'93Mitya, who is that looking at us?\'94 she whispered.\
\
Mitya turned, and saw that some one had, in fact, parted the curtains and\
seemed to be watching them. And not one person alone, it seemed.\
\
He jumped up and walked quickly to the intruder.\
\
\'93Here, come to us, come here,\'94 said a voice, speaking not loudly, but\
firmly and peremptorily.\
\
Mitya passed to the other side of the curtain and stood stock still. The\
room was filled with people, but not those who had been there before. An\
instantaneous shiver ran down his back, and he shuddered. He recognized\
all those people instantly. That tall, stout old man in the overcoat and\
forage\uc0\u8208 cap with a cockade\'97was the police captain, Mihail Makarovitch. And\
that \'93consumptive\uc0\u8208 looking\'94 trim dandy, \'93who always has such polished\
boots\'94\'97that was the deputy prosecutor. \'93He has a chronometer worth four\
hundred roubles; he showed it to me.\'94 And that small young man in\
spectacles.... Mitya forgot his surname though he knew him, had seen him:\
he was the \'93investigating lawyer,\'94 from the \'93school of jurisprudence,\'94 who\
had only lately come to the town. And this man\'97the inspector of police,\
Mavriky Mavrikyevitch, a man he knew well. And those fellows with the\
brass plates on, why are they here? And those other two ... peasants....\
And there at the door Kalganov with Trifon Borissovitch....\
\
\'93Gentlemen! What\'92s this for, gentlemen?\'94 began Mitya, but suddenly, as\
though beside himself, not knowing what he was doing, he cried aloud, at\
the top of his voice:\
\
\'93I un\'97der\'97stand!\'94\
\
The young man in spectacles moved forward suddenly, and stepping up to\
Mitya, began with dignity, though hurriedly:\
\
\'93We have to make ... in brief, I beg you to come this way, this way to the\
sofa.... It is absolutely imperative that you should give an explanation.\'94\
\
\'93The old man!\'94 cried Mitya frantically. \'93The old man and his blood!... I\
understand.\'94\
\
And he sank, almost fell, on a chair close by, as though he had been mown\
down by a scythe.\
\
\'93You understand? He understands it! Monster and parricide! Your father\'92s\
blood cries out against you!\'94 the old captain of police roared suddenly,\
stepping up to Mitya.\
\
He was beside himself, crimson in the face and quivering all over.\
\
\'93This is impossible!\'94 cried the small young man. \'93Mihail Makarovitch,\
Mihail Makarovitch, this won\'92t do!... I beg you\'92ll allow me to speak. I\
should never have expected such behavior from you....\'94\
\
\'93This is delirium, gentlemen, raving delirium,\'94 cried the captain of\
police; \'93look at him: drunk, at this time of night, in the company of a\
disreputable woman, with the blood of his father on his hands.... It\'92s\
delirium!...\'94\
\
\'93I beg you most earnestly, dear Mihail Makarovitch, to restrain your\
feelings,\'94 the prosecutor said in a rapid whisper to the old police\
captain, \'93or I shall be forced to resort to\'97\'94\
\
But the little lawyer did not allow him to finish. He turned to Mitya, and\
delivered himself in a loud, firm, dignified voice:\
\
\'93Ex\uc0\u8208 Lieutenant Karamazov, it is my duty to inform you that you are charged\
with the murder of your father, Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov, perpetrated\
this night....\'94\
\
He said something more, and the prosecutor, too, put in something, but\
though Mitya heard them he did not understand them. He stared at them all\
with wild eyes.\
\
\
\
\
Book IX. The Preliminary Investigation\
\
\
\
Chapter I. The Beginning Of Perhotin\'92s Official Career\
\
\
Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin, whom we left knocking at the strong locked gates\
of the widow Morozov\'92s house, ended, of course, by making himself heard.\
Fenya, who was still excited by the fright she had had two hours before,\
and too much \'93upset\'94 to go to bed, was almost frightened into hysterics on\
hearing the furious knocking at the gate. Though she had herself seen him\
drive away, she fancied that it must be Dmitri Fyodorovitch knocking\
again, no one else could knock so savagely. She ran to the house\uc0\u8208 porter,\
who had already waked up and gone out to the gate, and began imploring him\
not to open it. But having questioned Pyotr Ilyitch, and learned that he\
wanted to see Fenya on very \'93important business,\'94 the man made up his mind\
at last to open. Pyotr Ilyitch was admitted into Fenya\'92s kitchen, but the\
girl begged him to allow the house\uc0\u8208 porter to be present, \'93because of her\
misgivings.\'94 He began questioning her and at once learnt the most vital\
fact, that is, that when Dmitri Fyodorovitch had run out to look for\
Grushenka, he had snatched up a pestle from the mortar, and that when he\
returned, the pestle was not with him and his hands were smeared with\
blood.\
\
\'93And the blood was simply flowing, dripping from him, dripping!\'94 Fenya\
kept exclaiming. This horrible detail was simply the product of her\
disordered imagination. But although not \'93dripping,\'94 Pyotr Ilyitch had\
himself seen those hands stained with blood, and had helped to wash them.\
Moreover, the question he had to decide was not how soon the blood had\
dried, but where Dmitri Fyodorovitch had run with the pestle, or rather,\
whether it really was to Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s, and how he could\
satisfactorily ascertain. Pyotr Ilyitch persisted in returning to this\
point, and though he found out nothing conclusive, yet he carried away a\
conviction that Dmitri Fyodorovitch could have gone nowhere but to his\
father\'92s house, and that therefore something must have happened there.\
\
\'93And when he came back,\'94 Fenya added with excitement, \'93I told him the\
whole story, and then I began asking him, \'91Why have you got blood on your\
hands, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?\'92 and he answered that that was human blood,\
and that he had just killed some one. He confessed it all to me, and\
suddenly ran off like a madman. I sat down and began thinking, where\'92s he\
run off to now like a madman? He\'92ll go to Mokroe, I thought, and kill my\
mistress there. I ran out to beg him not to kill her. I was running to his\
lodgings, but I looked at Plotnikov\'92s shop, and saw him just setting off,\
and there was no blood on his hands then.\'94 (Fenya had noticed this and\
remembered it.) Fenya\'92s old grandmother confirmed her evidence as far as\
she was capable. After asking some further questions, Pyotr Ilyitch left\
the house, even more upset and uneasy than he had been when he entered it.\
\
The most direct and the easiest thing for him to do would have been to go\
straight to Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s, to find out whether anything had happened\
there, and if so, what; and only to go to the police captain, as Pyotr\
Ilyitch firmly intended doing, when he had satisfied himself of the fact.\
But the night was dark, Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s gates were strong, and he\
would have to knock again. His acquaintance with Fyodor Pavlovitch was of\
the slightest, and what if, after he had been knocking, they opened to\
him, and nothing had happened? Then Fyodor Pavlovitch in his jeering way\
would go telling the story all over the town, how a stranger, called\
Perhotin, had broken in upon him at midnight to ask if any one had killed\
him. It would make a scandal. And scandal was what Pyotr Ilyitch dreaded\
more than anything in the world.\
\
Yet the feeling that possessed him was so strong, that though he stamped\
his foot angrily and swore at himself, he set off again, not to Fyodor\
Pavlovitch\'92s but to Madame Hohlakov\'92s. He decided that if she denied\
having just given Dmitri Fyodorovitch three thousand roubles, he would go\
straight to the police captain, but if she admitted having given him the\
money, he would go home and let the matter rest till next morning.\
\
It is, of course, perfectly evident that there was even more likelihood of\
causing scandal by going at eleven o\'92clock at night to a fashionable lady,\
a complete stranger, and perhaps rousing her from her bed to ask her an\
amazing question, than by going to Fyodor Pavlovitch. But that is just how\
it is, sometimes, especially in cases like the present one, with the\
decisions of the most precise and phlegmatic people. Pyotr Ilyitch was by\
no means phlegmatic at that moment. He remembered all his life how a\
haunting uneasiness gradually gained possession of him, growing more and\
more painful and driving him on, against his will. Yet he kept cursing\
himself, of course, all the way for going to this lady, but \'93I will get to\
the bottom of it, I will!\'94 he repeated for the tenth time, grinding his\
teeth, and he carried out his intention.\
\
It was exactly eleven o\'92clock when he entered Madame Hohlakov\'92s house. He\
was admitted into the yard pretty quickly, but, in response to his inquiry\
whether the lady was still up, the porter could give no answer, except\
that she was usually in bed by that time.\
\
\'93Ask at the top of the stairs. If the lady wants to receive you, she\'92ll\
receive you. If she won\'92t, she won\'92t.\'94\
\
Pyotr Ilyitch went up, but did not find things so easy here. The footman\
was unwilling to take in his name, but finally called a maid. Pyotr\
Ilyitch politely but insistently begged her to inform her lady that an\
official, living in the town, called Perhotin, had called on particular\
business, and that if it were not of the greatest importance he would not\
have ventured to come. \'93Tell her in those words, in those words exactly,\'94\
he asked the girl.\
\
She went away. He remained waiting in the entry. Madame Hohlakov herself\
was already in her bedroom, though not yet asleep. She had felt upset ever\
since Mitya\'92s visit, and had a presentiment that she would not get through\
the night without the sick headache which always, with her, followed such\
excitement. She was surprised on hearing the announcement from the maid.\
She irritably declined to see him, however, though the unexpected visit at\
such an hour, of an \'93official living in the town,\'94 who was a total\
stranger, roused her feminine curiosity intensely. But this time Pyotr\
Ilyitch was as obstinate as a mule. He begged the maid most earnestly to\
take another message in these very words:\
\
\'93That he had come on business of the greatest importance, and that Madame\
Hohlakov might have cause to regret it later, if she refused to see him\
now.\'94\
\
\'93I plunged headlong,\'94 he described it afterwards.\
\
The maid, gazing at him in amazement, went to take his message again.\
Madame Hohlakov was impressed. She thought a little, asked what he looked\
like, and learned that he was \'93very well dressed, young and so polite.\'94 We\
may note, parenthetically, that Pyotr Ilyitch was a rather good\uc0\u8208 looking\
young man, and well aware of the fact. Madame Hohlakov made up her mind to\
see him. She was in her dressing\uc0\u8208 gown and slippers, but she flung a black\
shawl over her shoulders. \'93The official\'94 was asked to walk into the\
drawing\uc0\u8208 room, the very room in which Mitya had been received shortly\
before. The lady came to meet her visitor, with a sternly inquiring\
countenance, and, without asking him to sit down, began at once with the\
question:\
\
\'93What do you want?\'94\
\
\'93I have ventured to disturb you, madam, on a matter concerning our common\
acquaintance, Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov,\'94 Perhotin began.\
\
But he had hardly uttered the name, when the lady\'92s face showed signs of\
acute irritation. She almost shrieked, and interrupted him in a fury:\
\
\'93How much longer am I to be worried by that awful man?\'94 she cried\
hysterically. \'93How dare you, sir, how could you venture to disturb a lady\
who is a stranger to you, in her own house at such an hour!... And to\
force yourself upon her to talk of a man who came here, to this very\
drawing\uc0\u8208 room, only three hours ago, to murder me, and went stamping out of\
the room, as no one would go out of a decent house. Let me tell you, sir,\
that I shall lodge a complaint against you, that I will not let it pass.\
Kindly leave me at once.... I am a mother.... I ... I\'97\'94\
\
\'93Murder! then he tried to murder you, too?\'94\
\
\'93Why, has he killed somebody else?\'94 Madame Hohlakov asked impulsively.\
\
\'93If you would kindly listen, madam, for half a moment, I\'92ll explain it all\
in a couple of words,\'94 answered Perhotin, firmly. \'93At five o\'92clock this\
afternoon Dmitri Fyodorovitch borrowed ten roubles from me, and I know for\
a fact he had no money. Yet at nine o\'92clock, he came to see me with a\
bundle of hundred\uc0\u8208 rouble notes in his hand, about two or three thousand\
roubles. His hands and face were all covered with blood, and he looked\
like a madman. When I asked him where he had got so much money, he\
answered that he had just received it from you, that you had given him a\
sum of three thousand to go to the gold\uc0\u8208 mines....\'94\
\
Madame Hohlakov\'92s face assumed an expression of intense and painful\
excitement.\
\
\'93Good God! He must have killed his old father!\'94 she cried, clasping her\
hands. \'93I have never given him money, never! Oh, run, run!... Don\'92t say\
another word! Save the old man ... run to his father ... run!\'94\
\
\'93Excuse me, madam, then you did not give him money? You remember for a\
fact that you did not give him any money?\'94\
\
\'93No, I didn\'92t, I didn\'92t! I refused to give it him, for he could not\
appreciate it. He ran out in a fury, stamping. He rushed at me, but I\
slipped away.... And let me tell you, as I wish to hide nothing from you\
now, that he positively spat at me. Can you fancy that! But why are we\
standing? Ah, sit down.\'94\
\
\'93Excuse me, I....\'94\
\
\'93Or better run, run, you must run and save the poor old man from an awful\
death!\'94\
\
\'93But if he has killed him already?\'94\
\
\'93Ah, good heavens, yes! Then what are we to do now? What do you think we\
must do now?\'94\
\
Meantime she had made Pyotr Ilyitch sit down and sat down herself, facing\
him. Briefly, but fairly clearly, Pyotr Ilyitch told her the history of\
the affair, that part of it at least which he had himself witnessed. He\
described, too, his visit to Fenya, and told her about the pestle. All\
these details produced an overwhelming effect on the distracted lady, who\
kept uttering shrieks, and covering her face with her hands....\
\
\'93Would you believe it, I foresaw all this! I have that special faculty,\
whatever I imagine comes to pass. And how often I\'92ve looked at that awful\
man and always thought, that man will end by murdering me. And now it\'92s\
happened ... that is, if he hasn\'92t murdered me, but only his own father,\
it\'92s only because the finger of God preserved me, and what\'92s more, he was\
ashamed to murder me because, in this very place, I put the holy ikon from\
the relics of the holy martyr, Saint Varvara, on his neck.... And to think\
how near I was to death at that minute, I went close up to him and he\
stretched out his neck to me!... Do you know, Pyotr Ilyitch (I think you\
said your name was Pyotr Ilyitch), I don\'92t believe in miracles, but that\
ikon and this unmistakable miracle with me now\'97that shakes me, and I\'92m\
ready to believe in anything you like. Have you heard about Father\
Zossima?... But I don\'92t know what I\'92m saying ... and only fancy, with the\
ikon on his neck he spat at me.... He only spat, it\'92s true, he didn\'92t\
murder me and ... he dashed away! But what shall we do, what must we do\
now? What do you think?\'94\
\
Pyotr Ilyitch got up, and announced that he was going straight to the\
police captain, to tell him all about it, and leave him to do what he\
thought fit.\
\
\'93Oh, he\'92s an excellent man, excellent! Mihail Makarovitch, I know him. Of\
course, he\'92s the person to go to. How practical you are, Pyotr Ilyitch!\
How well you\'92ve thought of everything! I should never have thought of it\
in your place!\'94\
\
\'93Especially as I know the police captain very well, too,\'94 observed Pyotr\
Ilyitch, who still continued to stand, and was obviously anxious to escape\
as quickly as possible from the impulsive lady, who would not let him say\
good\uc0\u8208 by and go away.\
\
\'93And be sure, be sure,\'94 she prattled on, \'93to come back and tell me what\
you see there, and what you find out ... what comes to light ... how\
they\'92ll try him ... and what he\'92s condemned to.... Tell me, we have no\
capital punishment, have we? But be sure to come, even if it\'92s at three\
o\'92clock at night, at four, at half\uc0\u8208 past four.... Tell them to wake me, to\
wake me, to shake me, if I don\'92t get up.... But, good heavens, I shan\'92t\
sleep! But wait, hadn\'92t I better come with you?\'94\
\
\'93N\'97no. But if you would write three lines with your own hand, stating that\
you did not give Dmitri Fyodorovitch money, it might, perhaps, be of use\
... in case it\'92s needed....\'94\
\
\'93To be sure!\'94 Madame Hohlakov skipped, delighted, to her bureau. \'93And you\
know I\'92m simply struck, amazed at your resourcefulness, your good sense in\
such affairs. Are you in the service here? I\'92m delighted to think that\
you\'92re in the service here!\'94\
\
And still speaking, she scribbled on half a sheet of notepaper the\
following lines:\
\
\
    I\'92ve never in my life lent to that unhappy man, Dmitri\
    Fyodorovitch Karamazov (for, in spite of all, he is unhappy),\
    three thousand roubles to\uc0\u8208 day. I\'92ve never given him money, never:\
    That I swear by all that\'92s holy!\
\
    K. HOHLAKOV.\
\
\
\'93Here\'92s the note!\'94 she turned quickly to Pyotr Ilyitch. \'93Go, save him.\
It\'92s a noble deed on your part!\'94\
\
And she made the sign of the cross three times over him. She ran out to\
accompany him to the passage.\
\
\'93How grateful I am to you! You can\'92t think how grateful I am to you for\
having come to me, first. How is it I haven\'92t met you before? I shall feel\
flattered at seeing you at my house in the future. How delightful it is\
that you are living here!... Such precision! Such practical ability!...\
They must appreciate you, they must understand you. If there\'92s anything I\
can do, believe me ... oh, I love young people! I\'92m in love with young\
people! The younger generation are the one prop of our suffering country.\
Her one hope.... Oh, go, go!...\'94\
\
But Pyotr Ilyitch had already run away or she would not have let him go so\
soon. Yet Madame Hohlakov had made a rather agreeable impression on him,\
which had somewhat softened his anxiety at being drawn into such an\
unpleasant affair. Tastes differ, as we all know. \'93She\'92s by no means so\
elderly,\'94 he thought, feeling pleased, \'93on the contrary I should have\
taken her for her daughter.\'94\
\
As for Madame Hohlakov, she was simply enchanted by the young man. \'93Such\
sense! such exactness! in so young a man! in our day! and all that with\
such manners and appearance! People say the young people of to\uc0\u8208 day are no\
good for anything, but here\'92s an example!\'94 etc. So she simply forgot this\
\'93dreadful affair,\'94 and it was only as she was getting into bed, that,\
suddenly recalling \'93how near death she had been,\'94 she exclaimed: \'93Ah, it\
is awful, awful!\'94\
\
But she fell at once into a sound, sweet sleep.\
\
I would not, however, have dwelt on such trivial and irrelevant details,\
if this eccentric meeting of the young official with the by no means\
elderly widow had not subsequently turned out to be the foundation of the\
whole career of that practical and precise young man. His story is\
remembered to this day with amazement in our town, and I shall perhaps\
have something to say about it, when I have finished my long history of\
the Brothers Karamazov.\
\
\
\
Chapter II. The Alarm\
\
\
Our police captain, Mihail Makarovitch Makarov, a retired lieutenant\uc0\u8208 \
colonel, was a widower and an excellent man. He had only come to us three\
years previously, but had won general esteem, chiefly because he \'93knew how\
to keep society together.\'94 He was never without visitors, and could not\
have got on without them. Some one or other was always dining with him; he\
never sat down to table without guests. He gave regular dinners, too, on\
all sorts of occasions, sometimes most surprising ones. Though the fare\
was not _recherch\'e9_, it was abundant. The fish\uc0\u8208 pies were excellent, and\
the wine made up in quantity for what it lacked in quality.\
\
The first room his guests entered was a well\uc0\u8208 fitted billiard\u8208 room, with\
pictures of English race\uc0\u8208 horses, in black frames on the walls, an\
essential decoration, as we all know, for a bachelor\'92s billiard\uc0\u8208 room.\
There was card\uc0\u8208 playing every evening at his house, if only at one table.\
But at frequent intervals, all the society of our town, with the mammas\
and young ladies, assembled at his house to dance. Though Mihail\
Makarovitch was a widower, he did not live alone. His widowed daughter\
lived with him, with her two unmarried daughters, grown\uc0\u8208 up girls, who had\
finished their education. They were of agreeable appearance and lively\
character, and though every one knew they would have no dowry, they\
attracted all the young men of fashion to their grandfather\'92s house.\
\
Mihail Makarovitch was by no means very efficient in his work, though he\
performed his duties no worse than many others. To speak plainly, he was a\
man of rather narrow education. His understanding of the limits of his\
administrative power could not always be relied upon. It was not so much\
that he failed to grasp certain reforms enacted during the present reign,\
as that he made conspicuous blunders in his interpretation of them. This\
was not from any special lack of intelligence, but from carelessness, for\
he was always in too great a hurry to go into the subject.\
\
\'93I have the heart of a soldier rather than of a civilian,\'94 he used to say\
of himself. He had not even formed a definite idea of the fundamental\
principles of the reforms connected with the emancipation of the serfs,\
and only picked it up, so to speak, from year to year, involuntarily\
increasing his knowledge by practice. And yet he was himself a landowner.\
Pyotr Ilyitch knew for certain that he would meet some of Mihail\
Makarovitch\'92s visitors there that evening, but he didn\'92t know which. As it\
happened, at that moment the prosecutor, and Varvinsky, our district\
doctor, a young man, who had only just come to us from Petersburg after\
taking a brilliant degree at the Academy of Medicine, were playing whist\
at the police captain\'92s. Ippolit Kirillovitch, the prosecutor (he was\
really the deputy prosecutor, but we always called him the prosecutor),\
was rather a peculiar man, of about five and thirty, inclined to be\
consumptive, and married to a fat and childless woman. He was vain and\
irritable, though he had a good intellect, and even a kind heart. It\
seemed that all that was wrong with him was that he had a better opinion\
of himself than his ability warranted. And that made him seem constantly\
uneasy. He had, moreover, certain higher, even artistic, leanings, towards\
psychology, for instance, a special study of the human heart, a special\
knowledge of the criminal and his crime. He cherished a grievance on this\
ground, considering that he had been passed over in the service, and being\
firmly persuaded that in higher spheres he had not been properly\
appreciated, and had enemies. In gloomy moments he even threatened to give\
up his post, and practice as a barrister in criminal cases. The unexpected\
Karamazov case agitated him profoundly: \'93It was a case that might well be\
talked about all over Russia.\'94 But I am anticipating.\
\
Nikolay Parfenovitch Nelyudov, the young investigating lawyer, who had\
only come from Petersburg two months before, was sitting in the next room\
with the young ladies. People talked about it afterwards and wondered that\
all the gentlemen should, as though intentionally, on the evening of \'93the\
crime\'94 have been gathered together at the house of the executive\
authority. Yet it was perfectly simple and happened quite naturally.\
\
Ippolit Kirillovitch\'92s wife had had toothache for the last two days, and\
he was obliged to go out to escape from her groans. The doctor, from the\
very nature of his being, could not spend an evening except at cards.\
Nikolay Parfenovitch Nelyudov had been intending for three days past to\
drop in that evening at Mihail Makarovitch\'92s, so to speak casually, so as\
slyly to startle the eldest granddaughter, Olga Mihailovna, by showing\
that he knew her secret, that he knew it was her birthday, and that she\
was trying to conceal it on purpose, so as not to be obliged to give a\
dance. He anticipated a great deal of merriment, many playful jests about\
her age, and her being afraid to reveal it, about his knowing her secret\
and telling everybody, and so on. The charming young man was a great adept\
at such teasing; the ladies had christened him \'93the naughty man,\'94 and he\
seemed to be delighted at the name. He was extremely well\uc0\u8208 bred, however,\
of good family, education and feelings, and, though leading a life of\
pleasure, his sallies were always innocent and in good taste. He was\
short, and delicate\uc0\u8208 looking. On his white, slender, little fingers he\
always wore a number of big, glittering rings. When he was engaged in his\
official duties, he always became extraordinarily grave, as though\
realizing his position and the sanctity of the obligations laid upon him.\
He had a special gift for mystifying murderers and other criminals of the\
peasant class during interrogation, and if he did not win their respect,\
he certainly succeeded in arousing their wonder.\
\
Pyotr Ilyitch was simply dumbfounded when he went into the police\
captain\'92s. He saw instantly that every one knew. They had positively\
thrown down their cards, all were standing up and talking. Even Nikolay\
Parfenovitch had left the young ladies and run in, looking strenuous and\
ready for action. Pyotr Ilyitch was met with the astounding news that old\
Fyodor Pavlovitch really had been murdered that evening in his own house,\
murdered and robbed. The news had only just reached them in the following\
manner.\
\
Marfa Ignatyevna, the wife of old Grigory, who had been knocked senseless\
near the fence, was sleeping soundly in her bed and might well have slept\
till morning after the draught she had taken. But, all of a sudden she\
waked up, no doubt roused by a fearful epileptic scream from Smerdyakov,\
who was lying in the next room unconscious. That scream always preceded\
his fits, and always terrified and upset Marfa Ignatyevna. She could never\
get accustomed to it. She jumped up and ran half\uc0\u8208 awake to Smerdyakov\'92s\
room. But it was dark there, and she could only hear the invalid beginning\
to gasp and struggle. Then Marfa Ignatyevna herself screamed out and was\
going to call her husband, but suddenly realized that when she had got up,\
he was not beside her in bed. She ran back to the bedstead and began\
groping with her hands, but the bed was really empty. Then he must have\
gone out\'97where? She ran to the steps and timidly called him. She got no\
answer, of course, but she caught the sound of groans far away in the\
garden in the darkness. She listened. The groans were repeated, and it was\
evident they came from the garden.\
\
\'93Good Lord! Just as it was with Lizaveta Smerdyastchaya!\'94 she thought\
distractedly. She went timidly down the steps and saw that the gate into\
the garden was open.\
\
\'93He must be out there, poor dear,\'94 she thought. She went up to the gate\
and all at once she distinctly heard Grigory calling her by name, \'93Marfa!\
Marfa!\'94 in a weak, moaning, dreadful voice.\
\
\'93Lord, preserve us from harm!\'94 Marfa Ignatyevna murmured, and ran towards\
the voice, and that was how she found Grigory. But she found him not by\
the fence where he had been knocked down, but about twenty paces off. It\
appeared later, that he had crawled away on coming to himself, and\
probably had been a long time getting so far, losing consciousness several\
times. She noticed at once that he was covered with blood, and screamed at\
the top of her voice. Grigory was muttering incoherently:\
\
\'93He has murdered ... his father murdered.... Why scream, silly ... run ...\
fetch some one....\'94\
\
But Marfa continued screaming, and seeing that her master\'92s window was\
open and that there was a candle alight in the window, she ran there and\
began calling Fyodor Pavlovitch. But peeping in at the window, she saw a\
fearful sight. Her master was lying on his back, motionless, on the floor.\
His light\uc0\u8208 colored dressing\u8208 gown and white shirt were soaked with blood.\
The candle on the table brightly lighted up the blood and the motionless\
dead face of Fyodor Pavlovitch. Terror\uc0\u8208 stricken, Marfa rushed away from\
the window, ran out of the garden, drew the bolt of the big gate and ran\
headlong by the back way to the neighbor, Marya Kondratyevna. Both mother\
and daughter were asleep, but they waked up at Marfa\'92s desperate and\
persistent screaming and knocking at the shutter. Marfa, shrieking and\
screaming incoherently, managed to tell them the main fact, and to beg for\
assistance. It happened that Foma had come back from his wanderings and\
was staying the night with them. They got him up immediately and all three\
ran to the scene of the crime. On the way, Marya Kondratyevna remembered\
that at about eight o\'92clock she heard a dreadful scream from their garden,\
and this was no doubt Grigory\'92s scream, \'93Parricide!\'94 uttered when he\
caught hold of Mitya\'92s leg.\
\
\'93Some one person screamed out and then was silent,\'94 Marya Kondratyevna\
explained as she ran. Running to the place where Grigory lay, the two\
women with the help of Foma carried him to the lodge. They lighted a\
candle and saw that Smerdyakov was no better, that he was writhing in\
convulsions, his eyes fixed in a squint, and that foam was flowing from\
his lips. They moistened Grigory\'92s forehead with water mixed with vinegar,\
and the water revived him at once. He asked immediately:\
\
\'93Is the master murdered?\'94\
\
Then Foma and both the women ran to the house and saw this time that not\
only the window, but also the door into the garden was wide open, though\
Fyodor Pavlovitch had for the last week locked himself in every night and\
did not allow even Grigory to come in on any pretext. Seeing that door\
open, they were afraid to go in to Fyodor Pavlovitch \'93for fear anything\
should happen afterwards.\'94 And when they returned to Grigory, the old man\
told them to go straight to the police captain. Marya Kondratyevna ran\
there and gave the alarm to the whole party at the police captain\'92s. She\
arrived only five minutes before Pyotr Ilyitch, so that his story came,\
not as his own surmise and theory, but as the direct confirmation, by a\
witness, of the theory held by all, as to the identity of the criminal (a\
theory he had in the bottom of his heart refused to believe till that\
moment).\
\
It was resolved to act with energy. The deputy police inspector of the\
town was commissioned to take four witnesses, to enter Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s\
house and there to open an inquiry on the spot, according to the regular\
forms, which I will not go into here. The district doctor, a zealous man,\
new to his work, almost insisted on accompanying the police captain, the\
prosecutor, and the investigating lawyer.\
\
I will note briefly that Fyodor Pavlovitch was found to be quite dead,\
with his skull battered in. But with what? Most likely with the same\
weapon with which Grigory had been attacked. And immediately that weapon\
was found, Grigory, to whom all possible medical assistance was at once\
given, described in a weak and breaking voice how he had been knocked\
down. They began looking with a lantern by the fence and found the brass\
pestle dropped in a most conspicuous place on the garden path. There were\
no signs of disturbance in the room where Fyodor Pavlovitch was lying. But\
by the bed, behind the screen, they picked up from the floor a big and\
thick envelope with the inscription: \'93A present of three thousand roubles\
for my angel Grushenka, if she is willing to come.\'94 And below had been\
added by Fyodor Pavlovitch, \'93For my little chicken.\'94 There were three\
seals of red sealing\uc0\u8208 wax on the envelope, but it had been torn open and\
was empty: the money had been removed. They found also on the floor a\
piece of narrow pink ribbon, with which the envelope had been tied up.\
\
One piece of Pyotr Ilyitch\'92s evidence made a great impression on the\
prosecutor and the investigating magistrate, namely, his idea that Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch would shoot himself before daybreak, that he had resolved to\
do so, had spoken of it to Ilyitch, had taken the pistols, loaded them\
before him, written a letter, put it in his pocket, etc. When Pyotr\
Ilyitch, though still unwilling to believe in it, threatened to tell some\
one so as to prevent the suicide, Mitya had answered grinning: \'93You\'92ll be\
too late.\'94 So they must make haste to Mokroe to find the criminal, before\
he really did shoot himself.\
\
\'93That\'92s clear, that\'92s clear!\'94 repeated the prosecutor in great excitement.\
\'93That\'92s just the way with mad fellows like that: \'91I shall kill myself to\uc0\u8208 \
morrow, so I\'92ll make merry till I die!\'92 \'94\
\
The story of how he had bought the wine and provisions excited the\
prosecutor more than ever.\
\
\'93Do you remember the fellow that murdered a merchant called Olsufyev,\
gentlemen? He stole fifteen hundred, went at once to have his hair curled,\
and then, without even hiding the money, carrying it almost in his hand in\
the same way, he went off to the girls.\'94\
\
All were delayed, however, by the inquiry, the search, and the\
formalities, etc., in the house of Fyodor Pavlovitch. It all took time and\
so, two hours before starting, they sent on ahead to Mokroe the officer of\
the rural police, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch Schmertsov, who had arrived in the\
town the morning before to get his pay. He was instructed to avoid raising\
the alarm when he reached Mokroe, but to keep constant watch over the\
\'93criminal\'94 till the arrival of the proper authorities, to procure also\
witnesses for the arrest, police constables, and so on. Mavriky\
Mavrikyevitch did as he was told, preserving his incognito, and giving no\
one but his old acquaintance, Trifon Borissovitch, the slightest hint of\
his secret business. He had spoken to him just before Mitya met the\
landlord in the balcony, looking for him in the dark, and noticed at once\
a change in Trifon Borissovitch\'92s face and voice. So neither Mitya nor any\
one else knew that he was being watched. The box with the pistols had been\
carried off by Trifon Borissovitch and put in a suitable place. Only after\
four o\'92clock, almost at sunrise, all the officials, the police captain,\
the prosecutor, the investigating lawyer, drove up in two carriages, each\
drawn by three horses. The doctor remained at Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s to make\
a post\uc0\u8208 mortem next day on the body. But he was particularly interested in\
the condition of the servant, Smerdyakov.\
\
\'93Such violent and protracted epileptic fits, recurring continually for\
twenty\uc0\u8208 four hours, are rarely to be met with, and are of interest to\
science,\'94 he declared enthusiastically to his companions, and as they left\
they laughingly congratulated him on his find. The prosecutor and the\
investigating lawyer distinctly remembered the doctor\'92s saying that\
Smerdyakov could not outlive the night.\
\
After these long, but I think necessary explanations, we will return to\
that moment of our tale at which we broke off.\
\
\
\
Chapter III. The Sufferings Of A Soul, The First Ordeal\
\
\
And so Mitya sat looking wildly at the people round him, not understanding\
what was said to him. Suddenly he got up, flung up his hands, and shouted\
aloud:\
\
\'93I\'92m not guilty! I\'92m not guilty of that blood! I\'92m not guilty of my\
father\'92s blood.... I meant to kill him. But I\'92m not guilty. Not I.\'94\
\
But he had hardly said this, before Grushenka rushed from behind the\
curtain and flung herself at the police captain\'92s feet.\
\
\'93It was my fault! Mine! My wickedness!\'94 she cried, in a heartrending\
voice, bathed in tears, stretching out her clasped hands towards them. \'93He\
did it through me. I tortured him and drove him to it. I tortured that\
poor old man that\'92s dead, too, in my wickedness, and brought him to this!\
It\'92s my fault, mine first, mine most, my fault!\'94\
\
\'93Yes, it\'92s your fault! You\'92re the chief criminal! You fury! You harlot!\
You\'92re the most to blame!\'94 shouted the police captain, threatening her\
with his hand. But he was quickly and resolutely suppressed. The\
prosecutor positively seized hold of him.\
\
\'93This is absolutely irregular, Mihail Makarovitch!\'94 he cried. \'93You are\
positively hindering the inquiry.... You\'92re ruining the case....\'94 he\
almost gasped.\
\
\'93Follow the regular course! Follow the regular course!\'94 cried Nikolay\
Parfenovitch, fearfully excited too, \'93otherwise it\'92s absolutely\
impossible!...\'94\
\
\'93Judge us together!\'94 Grushenka cried frantically, still kneeling. \'93Punish\
us together. I will go with him now, if it\'92s to death!\'94\
\
\'93Grusha, my life, my blood, my holy one!\'94 Mitya fell on his knees beside\
her and held her tight in his arms. \'93Don\'92t believe her,\'94 he cried, \'93she\'92s\
not guilty of anything, of any blood, of anything!\'94\
\
He remembered afterwards that he was forcibly dragged away from her by\
several men, and that she was led out, and that when he recovered himself\
he was sitting at the table. Beside him and behind him stood the men with\
metal plates. Facing him on the other side of the table sat Nikolay\
Parfenovitch, the investigating lawyer. He kept persuading him to drink a\
little water out of a glass that stood on the table.\
\
\'93That will refresh you, that will calm you. Be calm, don\'92t be frightened,\'94\
he added, extremely politely. Mitya (he remembered it afterwards) became\
suddenly intensely interested in his big rings, one with an amethyst, and\
another with a transparent bright yellow stone, of great brilliance. And\
long afterwards he remembered with wonder how those rings had riveted his\
attention through all those terrible hours of interrogation, so that he\
was utterly unable to tear himself away from them and dismiss them, as\
things that had nothing to do with his position. On Mitya\'92s left side, in\
the place where Maximov had been sitting at the beginning of the evening,\
the prosecutor was now seated, and on Mitya\'92s right hand, where Grushenka\
had been, was a rosy\uc0\u8208 cheeked young man in a sort of shabby hunting\u8208 jacket,\
with ink and paper before him. This was the secretary of the investigating\
lawyer, who had brought him with him. The police captain was now standing\
by the window at the other end of the room, beside Kalganov, who was\
sitting there.\
\
\'93Drink some water,\'94 said the investigating lawyer softly, for the tenth\
time.\
\
\'93I have drunk it, gentlemen, I have ... but ... come, gentlemen, crush me,\
punish me, decide my fate!\'94 cried Mitya, staring with terribly fixed wide\uc0\u8208 \
open eyes at the investigating lawyer.\
\
\'93So you positively declare that you are not guilty of the death of your\
father, Fyodor Pavlovitch?\'94 asked the investigating lawyer, softly but\
insistently.\
\
\'93I am not guilty. I am guilty of the blood of another old man but not of\
my father\'92s. And I weep for it! I killed, I killed the old man and knocked\
him down.... But it\'92s hard to have to answer for that murder with another,\
a terrible murder of which I am not guilty.... It\'92s a terrible accusation,\
gentlemen, a knock\uc0\u8208 down blow. But who has killed my father, who has killed\
him? Who can have killed him if I didn\'92t? It\'92s marvelous, extraordinary,\
impossible.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, who can have killed him?\'94 the investigating lawyer was beginning,\
but Ippolit Kirillovitch, the prosecutor, glancing at him, addressed\
Mitya.\
\
\'93You need not worry yourself about the old servant, Grigory Vassilyevitch.\
He is alive, he has recovered, and in spite of the terrible blows\
inflicted, according to his own and your evidence, by you, there seems no\
doubt that he will live, so the doctor says, at least.\'94\
\
\'93Alive? He\'92s alive?\'94 cried Mitya, flinging up his hands. His face beamed.\
\'93Lord, I thank Thee for the miracle Thou has wrought for me, a sinner and\
evildoer. That\'92s an answer to my prayer. I\'92ve been praying all night.\'94 And\
he crossed himself three times. He was almost breathless.\
\
\'93So from this Grigory we have received such important evidence concerning\
you, that\'97\'94 The prosecutor would have continued, but Mitya suddenly jumped\
up from his chair.\
\
\'93One minute, gentlemen, for God\'92s sake, one minute; I will run to her\'97\'94\
\
\'93Excuse me, at this moment it\'92s quite impossible,\'94 Nikolay Parfenovitch\
almost shrieked. He, too, leapt to his feet. Mitya was seized by the men\
with the metal plates, but he sat down of his own accord....\
\
\'93Gentlemen, what a pity! I wanted to see her for one minute only; I wanted\
to tell her that it has been washed away, it has gone, that blood that was\
weighing on my heart all night, and that I am not a murderer now!\
Gentlemen, she is my betrothed!\'94 he said ecstatically and reverently,\
looking round at them all. \'93Oh, thank you, gentlemen! Oh, in one minute\
you have given me new life, new heart!... That old man used to carry me in\
his arms, gentlemen. He used to wash me in the tub when I was a baby three\
years old, abandoned by every one, he was like a father to me!...\'94\
\
\'93And so you\'97\'94 the investigating lawyer began.\
\
\'93Allow me, gentlemen, allow me one minute more,\'94 interposed Mitya, putting\
his elbows on the table and covering his face with his hands. \'93Let me have\
a moment to think, let me breathe, gentlemen. All this is horribly\
upsetting, horribly. A man is not a drum, gentlemen!\'94\
\
\'93Drink a little more water,\'94 murmured Nikolay Parfenovitch.\
\
Mitya took his hands from his face and laughed. His eyes were confident.\
He seemed completely transformed in a moment. His whole bearing was\
changed; he was once more the equal of these men, with all of whom he was\
acquainted, as though they had all met the day before, when nothing had\
happened, at some social gathering. We may note in passing that, on his\
first arrival, Mitya had been made very welcome at the police captain\'92s,\
but later, during the last month especially, Mitya had hardly called at\
all, and when the police captain met him, in the street, for instance,\
Mitya noticed that he frowned and only bowed out of politeness. His\
acquaintance with the prosecutor was less intimate, though he sometimes\
paid his wife, a nervous and fanciful lady, visits of politeness, without\
quite knowing why, and she always received him graciously and had, for\
some reason, taken an interest in him up to the last. He had not had time\
to get to know the investigating lawyer, though he had met him and talked\
to him twice, each time about the fair sex.\
\
\'93You\'92re a most skillful lawyer, I see, Nikolay Parfenovitch,\'94 cried Mitya,\
laughing gayly, \'93but I can help you now. Oh, gentlemen, I feel like a new\
man, and don\'92t be offended at my addressing you so simply and directly.\
I\'92m rather drunk, too, I\'92ll tell you that frankly. I believe I\'92ve had the\
honor and pleasure of meeting you, Nikolay Parfenovitch, at my kinsman\
Mi\'fcsov\'92s. Gentlemen, gentlemen, I don\'92t pretend to be on equal terms with\
you. I understand, of course, in what character I am sitting before you.\
Oh, of course, there\'92s a horrible suspicion ... hanging over me ... if\
Grigory has given evidence.... A horrible suspicion! It\'92s awful, awful, I\
understand that! But to business, gentlemen, I am ready, and we will make\
an end of it in one moment; for, listen, listen, gentlemen! Since I know\
I\'92m innocent, we can put an end to it in a minute. Can\'92t we? Can\'92t we?\'94\
\
Mitya spoke much and quickly, nervously and effusively, as though he\
positively took his listeners to be his best friends.\
\
\'93So, for the present, we will write that you absolutely deny the charge\
brought against you,\'94 said Nikolay Parfenovitch, impressively, and bending\
down to the secretary he dictated to him in an undertone what to write.\
\
\'93Write it down? You want to write that down? Well, write it; I consent, I\
give my full consent, gentlemen, only ... do you see?... Stay, stay, write\
this. Of disorderly conduct I am guilty, of violence on a poor old man I\
am guilty. And there is something else at the bottom of my heart, of which\
I am guilty, too\'97but that you need not write down\'94 (he turned suddenly to\
the secretary); \'93that\'92s my personal life, gentlemen, that doesn\'92t concern\
you, the bottom of my heart, that\'92s to say.... But of the murder of my old\
father I\'92m not guilty. That\'92s a wild idea. It\'92s quite a wild idea!... I\
will prove you that and you\'92ll be convinced directly.... You will laugh,\
gentlemen. You\'92ll laugh yourselves at your suspicion!...\'94\
\
\'93Be calm, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94 said the investigating lawyer evidently\
trying to allay Mitya\'92s excitement by his own composure. \'93Before we go on\
with our inquiry, I should like, if you will consent to answer, to hear\
you confirm the statement that you disliked your father, Fyodor\
Pavlovitch, that you were involved in continual disputes with him. Here at\
least, a quarter of an hour ago, you exclaimed that you wanted to kill\
him: \'91I didn\'92t kill him,\'92 you said, \'91but I wanted to kill him.\'92 \'94\
\
\'93Did I exclaim that? Ach, that may be so, gentlemen! Yes, unhappily, I did\
want to kill him ... many times I wanted to ... unhappily, unhappily!\'94\
\
\'93You wanted to. Would you consent to explain what motives precisely led\
you to such a sentiment of hatred for your parent?\'94\
\
\'93What is there to explain, gentlemen?\'94 Mitya shrugged his shoulders\
sullenly, looking down. \'93I have never concealed my feelings. All the town\
knows about it\'97every one knows in the tavern. Only lately I declared them\
in Father Zossima\'92s cell.... And the very same day, in the evening I beat\
my father. I nearly killed him, and I swore I\'92d come again and kill him,\
before witnesses.... Oh, a thousand witnesses! I\'92ve been shouting it aloud\
for the last month, any one can tell you that!... The fact stares you in\
the face, it speaks for itself, it cries aloud, but feelings, gentlemen,\
feelings are another matter. You see, gentlemen\'94\'97Mitya frowned\'97\'93it seems\
to me that about feelings you\'92ve no right to question me. I know that you\
are bound by your office, I quite understand that, but that\'92s my affair,\
my private, intimate affair, yet ... since I haven\'92t concealed my feelings\
in the past ... in the tavern, for instance, I\'92ve talked to every one, so\
... so I won\'92t make a secret of it now. You see, I understand, gentlemen,\
that there are terrible facts against me in this business. I told every\
one that I\'92d kill him, and now, all of a sudden, he\'92s been killed. So it\
must have been me! Ha ha! I can make allowances for you, gentlemen, I can\
quite make allowances. I\'92m struck all of a heap myself, for who can have\
murdered him, if not I? That\'92s what it comes to, isn\'92t it? If not I, who\
can it be, who? Gentlemen, I want to know, I insist on knowing!\'94 he\
exclaimed suddenly. \'93Where was he murdered? How was he murdered? How, and\
with what? Tell me,\'94 he asked quickly, looking at the two lawyers.\
\
\'93We found him in his study, lying on his back on the floor, with his head\
battered in,\'94 said the prosecutor.\
\
\'93That\'92s horrible!\'94 Mitya shuddered and, putting his elbows on the table,\
hid his face in his right hand.\
\
\'93We will continue,\'94 interposed Nikolay Parfenovitch. \'93So what was it that\
impelled you to this sentiment of hatred? You have asserted in public, I\
believe, that it was based upon jealousy?\'94\
\
\'93Well, yes, jealousy. And not only jealousy.\'94\
\
\'93Disputes about money?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, about money, too.\'94\
\
\'93There was a dispute about three thousand roubles, I think, which you\
claimed as part of your inheritance?\'94\
\
\'93Three thousand! More, more,\'94 cried Mitya hotly; \'93more than six thousand,\
more than ten, perhaps. I told every one so, shouted it at them. But I\
made up my mind to let it go at three thousand. I was desperately in need\
of that three thousand ... so the bundle of notes for three thousand that\
I knew he kept under his pillow, ready for Grushenka, I considered as\
simply stolen from me. Yes, gentlemen, I looked upon it as mine, as my own\
property....\'94\
\
The prosecutor looked significantly at the investigating lawyer, and had\
time to wink at him on the sly.\
\
\'93We will return to that subject later,\'94 said the lawyer promptly. \'93You\
will allow us to note that point and write it down; that you looked upon\
that money as your own property?\'94\
\
\'93Write it down, by all means. I know that\'92s another fact that tells\
against me, but I\'92m not afraid of facts and I tell them against myself. Do\
you hear? Do you know, gentlemen, you take me for a different sort of man\
from what I am,\'94 he added, suddenly gloomy and dejected. \'93You have to deal\
with a man of honor, a man of the highest honor; above all\'97don\'92t lose\
sight of it\'97a man who\'92s done a lot of nasty things, but has always been,\
and still is, honorable at bottom, in his inner being. I don\'92t know how to\
express it. That\'92s just what\'92s made me wretched all my life, that I\
yearned to be honorable, that I was, so to say, a martyr to a sense of\
honor, seeking for it with a lantern, with the lantern of Diogenes, and\
yet all my life I\'92ve been doing filthy things like all of us, gentlemen\
... that is like me alone. That was a mistake, like me alone, me alone!...\
Gentlemen, my head aches ...\'94 His brows contracted with pain. \'93You see,\
gentlemen, I couldn\'92t bear the look of him, there was something in him\
ignoble, impudent, trampling on everything sacred, something sneering and\
irreverent, loathsome, loathsome. But now that he\'92s dead, I feel\
differently.\'94\
\
\'93How do you mean?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t feel differently, but I wish I hadn\'92t hated him so.\'94\
\
\'93You feel penitent?\'94\
\
\'93No, not penitent, don\'92t write that. I\'92m not much good myself, I\'92m not\
very beautiful, so I had no right to consider him repulsive. That\'92s what I\
mean. Write that down, if you like.\'94\
\
Saying this Mitya became very mournful. He had grown more and more gloomy\
as the inquiry continued.\
\
At that moment another unexpected scene followed. Though Grushenka had\
been removed, she had not been taken far away, only into the room next but\
one from the blue room, in which the examination was proceeding. It was a\
little room with one window, next beyond the large room in which they had\
danced and feasted so lavishly. She was sitting there with no one by her\
but Maximov, who was terribly depressed, terribly scared, and clung to her\
side, as though for security. At their door stood one of the peasants with\
a metal plate on his breast. Grushenka was crying, and suddenly her grief\
was too much for her, she jumped up, flung up her arms and, with a loud\
wail of sorrow, rushed out of the room to him, to her Mitya, and so\
unexpectedly that they had not time to stop her. Mitya, hearing her cry,\
trembled, jumped up, and with a yell rushed impetuously to meet her, not\
knowing what he was doing. But they were not allowed to come together,\
though they saw one another. He was seized by the arms. He struggled, and\
tried to tear himself away. It took three or four men to hold him. She was\
seized too, and he saw her stretching out her arms to him, crying aloud as\
they carried her away. When the scene was over, he came to himself again,\
sitting in the same place as before, opposite the investigating lawyer,\
and crying out to them:\
\
\'93What do you want with her? Why do you torment her? She\'92s done nothing,\
nothing!...\'94\
\
The lawyers tried to soothe him. About ten minutes passed like this. At\
last Mihail Makarovitch, who had been absent, came hurriedly into the\
room, and said in a loud and excited voice to the prosecutor:\
\
\'93She\'92s been removed, she\'92s downstairs. Will you allow me to say one word\
to this unhappy man, gentlemen? In your presence, gentlemen, in your\
presence.\'94\
\
\'93By all means, Mihail Makarovitch,\'94 answered the investigating lawyer. \'93In\
the present case we have nothing against it.\'94\
\
\'93Listen, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, my dear fellow,\'94 began the police captain,\
and there was a look of warm, almost fatherly, feeling for the luckless\
prisoner on his excited face. \'93I took your Agrafena Alexandrovna\
downstairs myself, and confided her to the care of the landlord\'92s\
daughters, and that old fellow Maximov is with her all the time. And I\
soothed her, do you hear? I soothed and calmed her. I impressed on her\
that you have to clear yourself, so she mustn\'92t hinder you, must not\
depress you, or you may lose your head and say the wrong thing in your\
evidence. In fact, I talked to her and she understood. She\'92s a sensible\
girl, my boy, a good\uc0\u8208 hearted girl, she would have kissed my old hands,\
begging help for you. She sent me herself, to tell you not to worry about\
her. And I must go, my dear fellow, I must go and tell her that you are\
calm and comforted about her. And so you must be calm, do you understand?\
I was unfair to her; she is a Christian soul, gentlemen, yes, I tell you,\
she\'92s a gentle soul, and not to blame for anything. So what am I to tell\
her, Dmitri Fyodorovitch? Will you sit quiet or not?\'94\
\
The good\uc0\u8208 natured police captain said a great deal that was irregular, but\
Grushenka\'92s suffering, a fellow creature\'92s suffering, touched his good\uc0\u8208 \
natured heart, and tears stood in his eyes. Mitya jumped up and rushed\
towards him.\
\
\'93Forgive me, gentlemen, oh, allow me, allow me!\'94 he cried. \'93You\'92ve the\
heart of an angel, an angel, Mihail Makarovitch, I thank you for her. I\
will, I will be calm, cheerful, in fact. Tell her, in the kindness of your\
heart, that I am cheerful, quite cheerful, that I shall be laughing in a\
minute, knowing that she has a guardian angel like you. I shall have done\
with all this directly, and as soon as I\'92m free, I\'92ll be with her, she\'92ll\
see, let her wait. Gentlemen,\'94 he said, turning to the two lawyers, \'93now\
I\'92ll open my whole soul to you; I\'92ll pour out everything. We\'92ll finish\
this off directly, finish it off gayly. We shall laugh at it in the end,\
shan\'92t we? But, gentlemen, that woman is the queen of my heart. Oh, let me\
tell you that. That one thing I\'92ll tell you now.... I see I\'92m with\
honorable men. She is my light, she is my holy one, and if only you knew!\
Did you hear her cry, \'91I\'92ll go to death with you\'92? And what have I, a\
penniless beggar, done for her? Why such love for me? How can a clumsy,\
ugly brute like me, with my ugly face, deserve such love, that she is\
ready to go to exile with me? And how she fell down at your feet for my\
sake, just now!... and yet she\'92s proud and has done nothing! How can I\
help adoring her, how can I help crying out and rushing to her as I did\
just now? Gentlemen, forgive me! But now, now I am comforted.\'94\
\
And he sank back in his chair and, covering his face with his hands, burst\
into tears. But they were happy tears. He recovered himself instantly. The\
old police captain seemed much pleased, and the lawyers also. They felt\
that the examination was passing into a new phase. When the police captain\
went out, Mitya was positively gay.\
\
\'93Now, gentlemen, I am at your disposal, entirely at your disposal. And if\
it were not for all these trivial details, we should understand one\
another in a minute. I\'92m at those details again. I\'92m at your disposal,\
gentlemen, but I declare that we must have mutual confidence, you in me\
and I in you, or there\'92ll be no end to it. I speak in your interests. To\
business, gentlemen, to business, and don\'92t rummage in my soul; don\'92t\
tease me with trifles, but only ask me about facts and what matters, and I\
will satisfy you at once. And damn the details!\'94\
\
So spoke Mitya. The interrogation began again.\
\
\
\
Chapter IV. The Second Ordeal\
\
\
\'93You don\'92t know how you encourage us, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, by your\
readiness to answer,\'94 said Nikolay Parfenovitch, with an animated air, and\
obvious satisfaction beaming in his very prominent, short\uc0\u8208 sighted, light\
gray eyes, from which he had removed his spectacles a moment before. \'93And\
you have made a very just remark about the mutual confidence, without\
which it is sometimes positively impossible to get on in cases of such\
importance, if the suspected party really hopes and desires to defend\
himself and is in a position to do so. We, on our side, will do everything\
in our power, and you can see for yourself how we are conducting the case.\
You approve, Ippolit Kirillovitch?\'94 He turned to the prosecutor.\
\
\'93Oh, undoubtedly,\'94 replied the prosecutor. His tone was somewhat cold,\
compared with Nikolay Parfenovitch\'92s impulsiveness.\
\
I will note once for all that Nikolay Parfenovitch, who had but lately\
arrived among us, had from the first felt marked respect for Ippolit\
Kirillovitch, our prosecutor, and had become almost his bosom friend. He\
was almost the only person who put implicit faith in Ippolit\
Kirillovitch\'92s extraordinary talents as a psychologist and orator and in\
the justice of his grievance. He had heard of him in Petersburg. On the\
other hand, young Nikolay Parfenovitch was the only person in the whole\
world whom our \'93unappreciated\'94 prosecutor genuinely liked. On their way to\
Mokroe they had time to come to an understanding about the present case.\
And now as they sat at the table, the sharp\uc0\u8208 witted junior caught and\
interpreted every indication on his senior colleague\'92s face\'97half a word, a\
glance, or a wink.\
\
\'93Gentlemen, only let me tell my own story and don\'92t interrupt me with\
trivial questions and I\'92ll tell you everything in a moment,\'94 said Mitya\
excitedly.\
\
\'93Excellent! Thank you. But before we proceed to listen to your\
communication, will you allow me to inquire as to another little fact of\
great interest to us? I mean the ten roubles you borrowed yesterday at\
about five o\'92clock on the security of your pistols, from your friend,\
Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin.\'94\
\
\'93I pledged them, gentlemen. I pledged them for ten roubles. What more?\
That\'92s all about it. As soon as I got back to town I pledged them.\'94\
\
\'93You got back to town? Then you had been out of town?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I went a journey of forty versts into the country. Didn\'92t you know?\'94\
\
The prosecutor and Nikolay Parfenovitch exchanged glances.\
\
\'93Well, how would it be if you began your story with a systematic\
description of all you did yesterday, from the morning onwards? Allow us,\
for instance, to inquire why you were absent from the town, and just when\
you left and when you came back\'97all those facts.\'94\
\
\'93You should have asked me like that from the beginning,\'94 cried Mitya,\
laughing aloud, \'93and, if you like, we won\'92t begin from yesterday, but from\
the morning of the day before; then you\'92ll understand how, why, and where\
I went. I went the day before yesterday, gentlemen, to a merchant of the\
town, called Samsonov, to borrow three thousand roubles from him on safe\
security. It was a pressing matter, gentlemen, it was a sudden necessity.\'94\
\
\'93Allow me to interrupt you,\'94 the prosecutor put in politely. \'93Why were you\
in such pressing need for just that sum, three thousand?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, gentlemen, you needn\'92t go into details, how, when and why, and why\
just so much money, and not so much, and all that rigmarole. Why, it\'92ll\
run to three volumes, and then you\'92ll want an epilogue!\'94\
\
Mitya said all this with the good\uc0\u8208 natured but impatient familiarity of a\
man who is anxious to tell the whole truth and is full of the best\
intentions.\
\
\'93Gentlemen!\'94\'97he corrected himself hurriedly\'97\'93don\'92t be vexed with me for my\
restiveness, I beg you again. Believe me once more, I feel the greatest\
respect for you and understand the true position of affairs. Don\'92t think\
I\'92m drunk. I\'92m quite sober now. And, besides, being drunk would be no\
hindrance. It\'92s with me, you know, like the saying: \'91When he is sober, he\
is a fool; when he is drunk, he is a wise man.\'92 Ha ha! But I see,\
gentlemen, it\'92s not the proper thing to make jokes to you, till we\'92ve had\
our explanation, I mean. And I\'92ve my own dignity to keep up, too. I quite\
understand the difference for the moment. I am, after all, in the position\
of a criminal, and so, far from being on equal terms with you. And it\'92s\
your business to watch me. I can\'92t expect you to pat me on the head for\
what I did to Grigory, for one can\'92t break old men\'92s heads with impunity.\
I suppose you\'92ll put me away for him for six months, or a year perhaps, in\
a house of correction. I don\'92t know what the punishment is\'97but it will be\
without loss of the rights of my rank, without loss of my rank, won\'92t it?\
So you see, gentlemen, I understand the distinction between us.... But you\
must see that you could puzzle God Himself with such questions. \'91How did\
you step? Where did you step? When did you step? And on what did you\
step?\'92 I shall get mixed up, if you go on like this, and you will put it\
all down against me. And what will that lead to? To nothing! And even if\
it\'92s nonsense I\'92m talking now, let me finish, and you, gentlemen, being\
men of honor and refinement, will forgive me! I\'92ll finish by asking you,\
gentlemen, to drop that conventional method of questioning. I mean,\
beginning from some miserable trifle, how I got up, what I had for\
breakfast, how I spat, and where I spat, and so distracting the attention\
of the criminal, suddenly stun him with an overwhelming question, \'91Whom\
did you murder? Whom did you rob?\'92 Ha ha! That\'92s your regulation method,\
that\'92s where all your cunning comes in. You can put peasants off their\
guard like that, but not me. I know the tricks. I\'92ve been in the service,\
too. Ha ha ha! You\'92re not angry, gentlemen? You forgive my impertinence?\'94\
he cried, looking at them with a good\uc0\u8208 nature that was almost surprising.\
\'93It\'92s only Mitya Karamazov, you know, so you can overlook it. It would be\
inexcusable in a sensible man; but you can forgive it in Mitya. Ha ha!\'94\
\
Nikolay Parfenovitch listened, and laughed too. Though the prosecutor did\
not laugh, he kept his eyes fixed keenly on Mitya, as though anxious not\
to miss the least syllable, the slightest movement, the smallest twitch of\
any feature of his face.\
\
\'93That\'92s how we have treated you from the beginning,\'94 said Nikolay\
Parfenovitch, still laughing. \'93We haven\'92t tried to put you out by asking\
how you got up in the morning and what you had for breakfast. We began,\
indeed, with questions of the greatest importance.\'94\
\
\'93I understand. I saw it and appreciated it, and I appreciate still more\
your present kindness to me, an unprecedented kindness, worthy of your\
noble hearts. We three here are gentlemen, and let everything be on the\
footing of mutual confidence between educated, well\uc0\u8208 bred people, who have\
the common bond of noble birth and honor. In any case, allow me to look\
upon you as my best friends at this moment of my life, at this moment when\
my honor is assailed. That\'92s no offense to you, gentlemen, is it?\'94\
\
\'93On the contrary. You\'92ve expressed all that so well, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94\
Nikolay Parfenovitch answered with dignified approbation.\
\
\'93And enough of those trivial questions, gentlemen, all those tricky\
questions!\'94 cried Mitya enthusiastically. \'93Or there\'92s simply no knowing\
where we shall get to! Is there?\'94\
\
\'93I will follow your sensible advice entirely,\'94 the prosecutor interposed,\
addressing Mitya. \'93I don\'92t withdraw my question, however. It is now\
vitally important for us to know exactly why you needed that sum, I mean\
precisely three thousand.\'94\
\
\'93Why I needed it?... Oh, for one thing and another.... Well, it was to pay\
a debt.\'94\
\
\'93A debt to whom?\'94\
\
\'93That I absolutely refuse to answer, gentlemen. Not because I couldn\'92t, or\
because I shouldn\'92t dare, or because it would be damaging, for it\'92s all a\
paltry matter and absolutely trifling, but\'97I won\'92t, because it\'92s a matter\
of principle: that\'92s my private life, and I won\'92t allow any intrusion into\
my private life. That\'92s my principle. Your question has no bearing on the\
case, and whatever has nothing to do with the case is my private affair. I\
wanted to pay a debt. I wanted to pay a debt of honor but to whom I won\'92t\
say.\'94\
\
\'93Allow me to make a note of that,\'94 said the prosecutor.\
\
\'93By all means. Write down that I won\'92t say, that I won\'92t. Write that I\
should think it dishonorable to say. Ech! you can write it; you\'92ve nothing\
else to do with your time.\'94\
\
\'93Allow me to caution you, sir, and to remind you once more, if you are\
unaware of it,\'94 the prosecutor began, with a peculiar and stern\
impressiveness, \'93that you have a perfect right not to answer the questions\
put to you now, and we on our side have no right to extort an answer from\
you, if you decline to give it for one reason or another. That is entirely\
a matter for your personal decision. But it is our duty, on the other\
hand, in such cases as the present, to explain and set before you the\
degree of injury you will be doing yourself by refusing to give this or\
that piece of evidence. After which I will beg you to continue.\'94\
\
\'93Gentlemen, I\'92m not angry ... I ...\'94 Mitya muttered in a rather\
disconcerted tone. \'93Well, gentlemen, you see, that Samsonov to whom I went\
then ...\'94\
\
We will, of course, not reproduce his account of what is known to the\
reader already. Mitya was impatiently anxious not to omit the slightest\
detail. At the same time he was in a hurry to get it over. But as he gave\
his evidence it was written down, and therefore they had continually to\
pull him up. Mitya disliked this, but submitted; got angry, though still\
good\uc0\u8208 humoredly. He did, it is true, exclaim, from time to time,\
\'93Gentlemen, that\'92s enough to make an angel out of patience!\'94 Or,\
\'93Gentlemen, it\'92s no good your irritating me.\'94\
\
But even though he exclaimed he still preserved for a time his genially\
expansive mood. So he told them how Samsonov had made a fool of him two\
days before. (He had completely realized by now that he had been fooled.)\
The sale of his watch for six roubles to obtain money for the journey was\
something new to the lawyers. They were at once greatly interested, and\
even, to Mitya\'92s intense indignation, thought it necessary to write the\
fact down as a secondary confirmation of the circumstance that he had\
hardly a farthing in his pocket at the time. Little by little Mitya began\
to grow surly. Then, after describing his journey to see Lyagavy, the\
night spent in the stifling hut, and so on, he came to his return to the\
town. Here he began, without being particularly urged, to give a minute\
account of the agonies of jealousy he endured on Grushenka\'92s account.\
\
He was heard with silent attention. They inquired particularly into the\
circumstance of his having a place of ambush in Marya Kondratyevna\'92s house\
at the back of Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s garden to keep watch on Grushenka, and\
of Smerdyakov\'92s bringing him information. They laid particular stress on\
this, and noted it down. Of his jealousy he spoke warmly and at length,\
and though inwardly ashamed at exposing his most intimate feelings to\
\'93public ignominy,\'94 so to speak, he evidently overcame his shame in order\
to tell the truth. The frigid severity, with which the investigating\
lawyer, and still more the prosecutor, stared intently at him as he told\
his story, disconcerted him at last considerably.\
\
\'93That boy, Nikolay Parfenovitch, to whom I was talking nonsense about\
women only a few days ago, and that sickly prosecutor are not worth my\
telling this to,\'94 he reflected mournfully. \'93It\'92s ignominious. \'91Be patient,\
humble, hold thy peace.\'92 \'94 He wound up his reflections with that line. But\
he pulled himself together to go on again. When he came to telling of his\
visit to Madame Hohlakov, he regained his spirits and even wished to tell\
a little anecdote of that lady which had nothing to do with the case. But\
the investigating lawyer stopped him, and civilly suggested that he should\
pass on to \'93more essential matters.\'94 At last, when he described his\
despair and told them how, when he left Madame Hohlakov\'92s, he thought that\
he\'92d \'93get three thousand if he had to murder some one to do it,\'94 they\
stopped him again and noted down that he had \'93meant to murder some one.\'94\
Mitya let them write it without protest. At last he reached the point in\
his story when he learned that Grushenka had deceived him and had returned\
from Samsonov\'92s as soon as he left her there, though she had said that she\
would stay there till midnight.\
\
\'93If I didn\'92t kill Fenya then, gentlemen, it was only because I hadn\'92t\
time,\'94 broke from him suddenly at that point in his story. That, too, was\
carefully written down. Mitya waited gloomily, and was beginning to tell\
how he ran into his father\'92s garden when the investigating lawyer suddenly\
stopped him, and opening the big portfolio that lay on the sofa beside him\
he brought out the brass pestle.\
\
\'93Do you recognize this object?\'94 he asked, showing it to Mitya.\
\
\'93Oh, yes,\'94 he laughed gloomily. \'93Of course I recognize it. Let me have a\
look at it.... Damn it, never mind!\'94\
\
\'93You have forgotten to mention it,\'94 observed the investigating lawyer.\
\
\'93Hang it all, I shouldn\'92t have concealed it from you. Do you suppose I\
could have managed without it? It simply escaped my memory.\'94\
\
\'93Be so good as to tell us precisely how you came to arm yourself with it.\'94\
\
\'93Certainly I will be so good, gentlemen.\'94\
\
And Mitya described how he took the pestle and ran.\
\
\'93But what object had you in view in arming yourself with such a weapon?\'94\
\
\'93What object? No object. I just picked it up and ran off.\'94\
\
\'93What for, if you had no object?\'94\
\
Mitya\'92s wrath flared up. He looked intently at \'93the boy\'94 and smiled\
gloomily and malignantly. He was feeling more and more ashamed at having\
told \'93such people\'94 the story of his jealousy so sincerely and\
spontaneously.\
\
\'93Bother the pestle!\'94 broke from him suddenly.\
\
\'93But still\'97\'94\
\
\'93Oh, to keep off dogs.... Oh, because it was dark.... In case anything\
turned up.\'94\
\
\'93But have you ever on previous occasions taken a weapon with you when you\
went out, since you\'92re afraid of the dark?\'94\
\
\'93Ugh! damn it all, gentlemen! There\'92s positively no talking to you!\'94 cried\
Mitya, exasperated beyond endurance, and turning to the secretary, crimson\
with anger, he said quickly, with a note of fury in his voice:\
\
\'93Write down at once ... at once ... \'91that I snatched up the pestle to go\
and kill my father ... Fyodor Pavlovitch ... by hitting him on the head\
with it!\'92 Well, now are you satisfied, gentlemen? Are your minds\
relieved?\'94 he said, glaring defiantly at the lawyers.\
\
\'93We quite understand that you made that statement just now through\
exasperation with us and the questions we put to you, which you consider\
trivial, though they are, in fact, essential,\'94 the prosecutor remarked\
dryly in reply.\
\
\'93Well, upon my word, gentlemen! Yes, I took the pestle.... What does one\
pick things up for at such moments? I don\'92t know what for. I snatched it\
up and ran\'97that\'92s all. For to me, gentlemen, _passons_, or I declare I\
won\'92t tell you any more.\'94\
\
He sat with his elbows on the table and his head in his hand. He sat\
sideways to them and gazed at the wall, struggling against a feeling of\
nausea. He had, in fact, an awful inclination to get up and declare that\
he wouldn\'92t say another word, \'93not if you hang me for it.\'94\
\
\'93You see, gentlemen,\'94 he said at last, with difficulty controlling\
himself, \'93you see. I listen to you and am haunted by a dream.... It\'92s a\
dream I have sometimes, you know.... I often dream it\'97it\'92s always the same\
... that some one is hunting me, some one I\'92m awfully afraid of ... that\
he\'92s hunting me in the dark, in the night ... tracking me, and I hide\
somewhere from him, behind a door or cupboard, hide in a degrading way,\
and the worst of it is, he always knows where I am, but he pretends not to\
know where I am on purpose, to prolong my agony, to enjoy my terror....\
That\'92s just what you\'92re doing now. It\'92s just like that!\'94\
\
\'93Is that the sort of thing you dream about?\'94 inquired the prosecutor.\
\
\'93Yes, it is. Don\'92t you want to write it down?\'94 said Mitya, with a\
distorted smile.\
\
\'93No; no need to write it down. But still you do have curious dreams.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s not a question of dreams now, gentlemen\'97this is realism, this is\
real life! I\'92m a wolf and you\'92re the hunters. Well, hunt him down!\'94\
\
\'93You are wrong to make such comparisons ...\'94 began Nikolay Parfenovitch,\
with extraordinary softness.\
\
\'93No, I\'92m not wrong, not at all!\'94 Mitya flared up again, though his\
outburst of wrath had obviously relieved his heart. He grew more good\uc0\u8208 \
humored at every word. \'93You may not trust a criminal or a man on trial\
tortured by your questions, but an honorable man, the honorable impulses\
of the heart (I say that boldly!)\'97no! That you must believe you have no\
right indeed ... but\'97\
\
\
    Be silent, heart,\
    Be patient, humble, hold thy peace.\
\
\
Well, shall I go on?\'94 he broke off gloomily.\
\
\'93If you\'92ll be so kind,\'94 answered Nikolay Parfenovitch.\
\
\
\
Chapter V. The Third Ordeal\
\
\
Though Mitya spoke sullenly, it was evident that he was trying more than\
ever not to forget or miss a single detail of his story. He told them how\
he had leapt over the fence into his father\'92s garden; how he had gone up\
to the window; told them all that had passed under the window. Clearly,\
precisely, distinctly, he described the feelings that troubled him during\
those moments in the garden when he longed so terribly to know whether\
Grushenka was with his father or not. But, strange to say, both the\
lawyers listened now with a sort of awful reserve, looked coldly at him,\
asked few questions. Mitya could gather nothing from their faces.\
\
\'93They\'92re angry and offended,\'94 he thought. \'93Well, bother them!\'94\
\
When he described how he made up his mind at last to make the \'93signal\'94 to\
his father that Grushenka had come, so that he should open the window, the\
lawyers paid no attention to the word \'93signal,\'94 as though they entirely\
failed to grasp the meaning of the word in this connection: so much so,\
that Mitya noticed it. Coming at last to the moment when, seeing his\
father peering out of the window, his hatred flared up and he pulled the\
pestle out of his pocket, he suddenly, as though of design, stopped short.\
He sat gazing at the wall and was aware that their eyes were fixed upon\
him.\
\
\'93Well?\'94 said the investigating lawyer. \'93You pulled out the weapon and ...\
and what happened then?\'94\
\
\'93Then? Why, then I murdered him ... hit him on the head and cracked his\
skull.... I suppose that\'92s your story. That\'92s it!\'94\
\
His eyes suddenly flashed. All his smothered wrath suddenly flamed up with\
extraordinary violence in his soul.\
\
\'93Our story?\'94 repeated Nikolay Parfenovitch. \'93Well\'97and yours?\'94\
\
Mitya dropped his eyes and was a long time silent.\
\
\'93My story, gentlemen? Well, it was like this,\'94 he began softly. \'93Whether\
it was some one\'92s tears, or my mother prayed to God, or a good angel\
kissed me at that instant, I don\'92t know. But the devil was conquered. I\
rushed from the window and ran to the fence. My father was alarmed and,\
for the first time, he saw me then, cried out, and sprang back from the\
window. I remember that very well. I ran across the garden to the fence\
... and there Grigory caught me, when I was sitting on the fence.\'94\
\
At that point he raised his eyes at last and looked at his listeners. They\
seemed to be staring at him with perfectly unruffled attention. A sort of\
paroxysm of indignation seized on Mitya\'92s soul.\
\
\'93Why, you\'92re laughing at me at this moment, gentlemen!\'94 he broke off\
suddenly.\
\
\'93What makes you think that?\'94 observed Nikolay Parfenovitch.\
\
\'93You don\'92t believe one word\'97that\'92s why! I understand, of course, that I\
have come to the vital point. The old man\'92s lying there now with his skull\
broken, while I\'97after dramatically describing how I wanted to kill him,\
and how I snatched up the pestle\'97I suddenly run away from the window. A\
romance! Poetry! As though one could believe a fellow on his word. Ha ha!\
You are scoffers, gentlemen!\'94\
\
And he swung round on his chair so that it creaked.\
\
\'93And did you notice,\'94 asked the prosecutor suddenly, as though not\
observing Mitya\'92s excitement, \'93did you notice when you ran away from the\
window, whether the door into the garden was open?\'94\
\
\'93No, it was not open.\'94\
\
\'93It was not?\'94\
\
\'93It was shut. And who could open it? Bah! the door. Wait a bit!\'94 he seemed\
suddenly to bethink himself, and almost with a start:\
\
\'93Why, did you find the door open?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, it was open.\'94\
\
\'93Why, who could have opened it if you did not open it yourselves?\'94 cried\
Mitya, greatly astonished.\
\
\'93The door stood open, and your father\'92s murderer undoubtedly went in at\
that door, and, having accomplished the crime, went out again by the same\
door,\'94 the prosecutor pronounced deliberately, as though chiseling out\
each word separately. \'93That is perfectly clear. The murder was committed\
in the room and _not through the __ window_; that is absolutely certain\
from the examination that has been made, from the position of the body and\
everything. There can be no doubt of that circumstance.\'94\
\
Mitya was absolutely dumbfounded.\
\
\'93But that\'92s utterly impossible!\'94 he cried, completely at a loss. \'93I ... I\
didn\'92t go in.... I tell you positively, definitely, the door was shut the\
whole time I was in the garden, and when I ran out of the garden. I only\
stood at the window and saw him through the window. That\'92s all, that\'92s\
all.... I remember to the last minute. And if I didn\'92t remember, it would\
be just the same. I know it, for no one knew the signals except\
Smerdyakov, and me, and the dead man. And he wouldn\'92t have opened the door\
to any one in the world without the signals.\'94\
\
\'93Signals? What signals?\'94 asked the prosecutor, with greedy, almost\
hysterical, curiosity. He instantly lost all trace of his reserve and\
dignity. He asked the question with a sort of cringing timidity. He\
scented an important fact of which he had known nothing, and was already\
filled with dread that Mitya might be unwilling to disclose it.\
\
\'93So you didn\'92t know!\'94 Mitya winked at him with a malicious and mocking\
smile. \'93What if I won\'92t tell you? From whom could you find out? No one\
knew about the signals except my father, Smerdyakov, and me: that was all.\
Heaven knew, too, but it won\'92t tell you. But it\'92s an interesting fact.\
There\'92s no knowing what you might build on it. Ha ha! Take comfort,\
gentlemen, I\'92ll reveal it. You\'92ve some foolish idea in your hearts. You\
don\'92t know the man you have to deal with! You have to do with a prisoner\
who gives evidence against himself, to his own damage! Yes, for I\'92m a man\
of honor and you\'97are not.\'94\
\
The prosecutor swallowed this without a murmur. He was trembling with\
impatience to hear the new fact. Minutely and diffusely Mitya told them\
everything about the signals invented by Fyodor Pavlovitch for Smerdyakov.\
He told them exactly what every tap on the window meant, tapped the\
signals on the table, and when Nikolay Parfenovitch said that he supposed\
he, Mitya, had tapped the signal \'93Grushenka has come,\'94 when he tapped to\
his father, he answered precisely that he had tapped that signal, that\
\'93Grushenka had come.\'94\
\
\'93So now you can build up your tower,\'94 Mitya broke off, and again turned\
away from them contemptuously.\
\
\'93So no one knew of the signals but your dead father, you, and the valet\
Smerdyakov? And no one else?\'94 Nikolay Parfenovitch inquired once more.\
\
\'93Yes. The valet Smerdyakov, and Heaven. Write down about Heaven. That may\
be of use. Besides, you will need God yourselves.\'94\
\
And they had already, of course, begun writing it down. But while they\
wrote, the prosecutor said suddenly, as though pitching on a new idea:\
\
\'93But if Smerdyakov also knew of these signals and you absolutely deny all\
responsibility for the death of your father, was it not he, perhaps, who\
knocked the signal agreed upon, induced your father to open to him, and\
then ... committed the crime?\'94\
\
Mitya turned upon him a look of profound irony and intense hatred. His\
silent stare lasted so long that it made the prosecutor blink.\
\
\'93You\'92ve caught the fox again,\'94 commented Mitya at last; \'93you\'92ve got the\
beast by the tail. Ha ha! I see through you, Mr. Prosecutor. You thought,\
of course, that I should jump at that, catch at your prompting, and shout\
with all my might, \'91Aie! it\'92s Smerdyakov; he\'92s the murderer.\'92 Confess\
that\'92s what you thought. Confess, and I\'92ll go on.\'94\
\
But the prosecutor did not confess. He held his tongue and waited.\
\
\'93You\'92re mistaken. I\'92m not going to shout \'91It\'92s Smerdyakov,\'92 \'94 said Mitya.\
\
\'93And you don\'92t even suspect him?\'94\
\
\'93Why, do you suspect him?\'94\
\
\'93He is suspected, too.\'94\
\
Mitya fixed his eyes on the floor.\
\
\'93Joking apart,\'94 he brought out gloomily. \'93Listen. From the very beginning,\
almost from the moment when I ran out to you from behind the curtain, I\'92ve\
had the thought of Smerdyakov in my mind. I\'92ve been sitting here, shouting\
that I\'92m innocent and thinking all the time \'91Smerdyakov!\'92 I can\'92t get\
Smerdyakov out of my head. In fact, I, too, thought of Smerdyakov just\
now; but only for a second. Almost at once I thought, \'91No, it\'92s not\
Smerdyakov.\'92 It\'92s not his doing, gentlemen.\'94\
\
\'93In that case is there anybody else you suspect?\'94 Nikolay Parfenovitch\
inquired cautiously.\
\
\'93I don\'92t know any one it could be, whether it\'92s the hand of Heaven or\
Satan, but ... not Smerdyakov,\'94 Mitya jerked out with decision.\
\
\'93But what makes you affirm so confidently and emphatically that it\'92s not\
he?\'94\
\
\'93From my conviction\'97my impression. Because Smerdyakov is a man of the most\
abject character and a coward. He\'92s not a coward, he\'92s the epitome of all\
the cowardice in the world walking on two legs. He has the heart of a\
chicken. When he talked to me, he was always trembling for fear I should\
kill him, though I never raised my hand against him. He fell at my feet\
and blubbered; he has kissed these very boots, literally, beseeching me\
\'91not to frighten him.\'92 Do you hear? \'91Not to frighten him.\'92 What a thing to\
say! Why, I offered him money. He\'92s a puling chicken\'97sickly, epileptic,\
weak\uc0\u8208 minded\'97a child of eight could thrash him. He has no character worth\
talking about. It\'92s not Smerdyakov, gentlemen. He doesn\'92t care for money;\
he wouldn\'92t take my presents. Besides, what motive had he for murdering\
the old man? Why, he\'92s very likely his son, you know\'97his natural son. Do\
you know that?\'94\
\
\'93We have heard that legend. But you are your father\'92s son, too, you know;\
yet you yourself told every one you meant to murder him.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s a thrust! And a nasty, mean one, too! I\'92m not afraid! Oh,\
gentlemen, isn\'92t it too base of you to say that to my face? It\'92s base,\
because I told you that myself. I not only wanted to murder him, but I\
might have done it. And, what\'92s more, I went out of my way to tell you of\
my own accord that I nearly murdered him. But, you see, I didn\'92t murder\
him; you see, my guardian angel saved me\'97that\'92s what you\'92ve not taken into\
account. And that\'92s why it\'92s so base of you. For I didn\'92t kill him, I\
didn\'92t kill him! Do you hear, I did not kill him.\'94\
\
He was almost choking. He had not been so moved before during the whole\
interrogation.\
\
\'93And what has he told you, gentlemen\'97Smerdyakov, I mean?\'94 he added\
suddenly, after a pause. \'93May I ask that question?\'94\
\
\'93You may ask any question,\'94 the prosecutor replied with frigid severity,\
\'93any question relating to the facts of the case, and we are, I repeat,\
bound to answer every inquiry you make. We found the servant Smerdyakov,\
concerning whom you inquire, lying unconscious in his bed, in an epileptic\
fit of extreme severity, that had recurred, possibly, ten times. The\
doctor who was with us told us, after seeing him, that he may possibly not\
outlive the night.\'94\
\
\'93Well, if that\'92s so, the devil must have killed him,\'94 broke suddenly from\
Mitya, as though until that moment he had been asking himself: \'93Was it\
Smerdyakov or not?\'94\
\
\'93We will come back to this later,\'94 Nikolay Parfenovitch decided. \'93Now,\
wouldn\'92t you like to continue your statement?\'94\
\
Mitya asked for a rest. His request was courteously granted. After\
resting, he went on with his story. But he was evidently depressed. He was\
exhausted, mortified and morally shaken. To make things worse the\
prosecutor exasperated him, as though intentionally, by vexatious\
interruptions about \'93trifling points.\'94 Scarcely had Mitya described how,\
sitting on the wall, he had struck Grigory on the head with the pestle,\
while the old man had hold of his left leg, and how he had then jumped\
down to look at him, when the prosecutor stopped him to ask him to\
describe exactly how he was sitting on the wall. Mitya was surprised.\
\
\'93Oh, I was sitting like this, astride, one leg on one side of the wall and\
one on the other.\'94\
\
\'93And the pestle?\'94\
\
\'93The pestle was in my hand.\'94\
\
\'93Not in your pocket? Do you remember that precisely? Was it a violent blow\
you gave him?\'94\
\
\'93It must have been a violent one. But why do you ask?\'94\
\
\'93Would you mind sitting on the chair just as you sat on the wall then and\
showing us just how you moved your arm, and in what direction?\'94\
\
\'93You\'92re making fun of me, aren\'92t you?\'94 asked Mitya, looking haughtily at\
the speaker; but the latter did not flinch.\
\
Mitya turned abruptly, sat astride on his chair, and swung his arm.\
\
\'93This was how I struck him! That\'92s how I knocked him down! What more do\
you want?\'94\
\
\'93Thank you. May I trouble you now to explain why you jumped down, with\
what object, and what you had in view?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, hang it!... I jumped down to look at the man I\'92d hurt ... I don\'92t\
know what for!\'94\
\
\'93Though you were so excited and were running away?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, though I was excited and running away.\'94\
\
\'93You wanted to help him?\'94\
\
\'93Help!... Yes, perhaps I did want to help him.... I don\'92t remember.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t remember? Then you didn\'92t quite know what you were doing?\'94\
\
\'93Not at all. I remember everything\'97every detail. I jumped down to look at\
him, and wiped his face with my handkerchief.\'94\
\
\'93We have seen your handkerchief. Did you hope to restore him to\
consciousness?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know whether I hoped it. I simply wanted to make sure whether he\
was alive or not.\'94\
\
\'93Ah! You wanted to be sure? Well, what then?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m not a doctor. I couldn\'92t decide. I ran away thinking I\'92d killed him.\
And now he\'92s recovered.\'94\
\
\'93Excellent,\'94 commented the prosecutor. \'93Thank you. That\'92s all I wanted.\
Kindly proceed.\'94\
\
Alas! it never entered Mitya\'92s head to tell them, though he remembered it,\
that he had jumped back from pity, and standing over the prostrate figure\
had even uttered some words of regret: \'93You\'92ve come to grief, old\
man\'97there\'92s no help for it. Well, there you must lie.\'94\
\
The prosecutor could only draw one conclusion: that the man had jumped\
back \'93at such a moment and in such excitement simply with the object of\
ascertaining whether the _only_ witness of his crime were dead; that he\
must therefore have been a man of great strength, coolness, decision and\
foresight even at such a moment,\'94 ... and so on. The prosecutor was\
satisfied: \'93I\'92ve provoked the nervous fellow by \'91trifles\'92 and he has said\
more than he meant to.\'94\
\
With painful effort Mitya went on. But this time he was pulled up\
immediately by Nikolay Parfenovitch.\
\
\'93How came you to run to the servant, Fedosya Markovna, with your hands so\
covered with blood, and, as it appears, your face, too?\'94\
\
\'93Why, I didn\'92t notice the blood at all at the time,\'94 answered Mitya.\
\
\'93That\'92s quite likely. It does happen sometimes.\'94 The prosecutor exchanged\
glances with Nikolay Parfenovitch.\
\
\'93I simply didn\'92t notice. You\'92re quite right there, prosecutor,\'94 Mitya\
assented suddenly.\
\
Next came the account of Mitya\'92s sudden determination to \'93step aside\'94 and\
make way for their happiness. But he could not make up his mind to open\
his heart to them as before, and tell them about \'93the queen of his soul.\'94\
He disliked speaking of her before these chilly persons \'93who were\
fastening on him like bugs.\'94 And so in response to their reiterated\
questions he answered briefly and abruptly:\
\
\'93Well, I made up my mind to kill myself. What had I left to live for? That\
question stared me in the face. Her first rightful lover had come back,\
the man who wronged her but who\'92d hurried back to offer his love, after\
five years, and atone for the wrong with marriage.... So I knew it was all\
over for me.... And behind me disgrace, and that blood\'97Grigory\'92s.... What\
had I to live for? So I went to redeem the pistols I had pledged, to load\
them and put a bullet in my brain to\uc0\u8208 morrow.\'94\
\
\'93And a grand feast the night before?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, a grand feast the night before. Damn it all, gentlemen! Do make\
haste and finish it. I meant to shoot myself not far from here, beyond the\
village, and I\'92d planned to do it at five o\'92clock in the morning. And I\
had a note in my pocket already. I wrote it at Perhotin\'92s when I loaded my\
pistols. Here\'92s the letter. Read it! It\'92s not for you I tell it,\'94 he added\
contemptuously. He took it from his waistcoat pocket and flung it on the\
table. The lawyers read it with curiosity, and, as is usual, added it to\
the papers connected with the case.\
\
\'93And you didn\'92t even think of washing your hands at Perhotin\'92s? You were\
not afraid then of arousing suspicion?\'94\
\
\'93What suspicion? Suspicion or not, I should have galloped here just the\
same, and shot myself at five o\'92clock, and you wouldn\'92t have been in time\
to do anything. If it hadn\'92t been for what\'92s happened to my father, you\
would have known nothing about it, and wouldn\'92t have come here. Oh, it\'92s\
the devil\'92s doing. It was the devil murdered father, it was through the\
devil that you found it out so soon. How did you manage to get here so\
quick? It\'92s marvelous, a dream!\'94\
\
\'93Mr. Perhotin informed us that when you came to him, you held in your\
hands ... your blood\uc0\u8208 stained hands ... your money ... a lot of money ... a\
bundle of hundred\uc0\u8208 rouble notes, and that his servant\u8208 boy saw it too.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s true, gentlemen. I remember it was so.\'94\
\
\'93Now, there\'92s one little point presents itself. Can you inform us,\'94\
Nikolay Parfenovitch began, with extreme gentleness, \'93where did you get so\
much money all of a sudden, when it appears from the facts, from the\
reckoning of time, that you had not been home?\'94\
\
The prosecutor\'92s brows contracted at the question being asked so plainly,\
but he did not interrupt Nikolay Parfenovitch.\
\
\'93No, I didn\'92t go home,\'94 answered Mitya, apparently perfectly composed, but\
looking at the floor.\
\
\'93Allow me then to repeat my question,\'94 Nikolay Parfenovitch went on as\
though creeping up to the subject. \'93Where were you able to procure such a\
sum all at once, when by your own confession, at five o\'92clock the same day\
you\'97\'94\
\
\'93I was in want of ten roubles and pledged my pistols with Perhotin, and\
then went to Madame Hohlakov to borrow three thousand which she wouldn\'92t\
give me, and so on, and all the rest of it,\'94 Mitya interrupted sharply.\
\'93Yes, gentlemen, I was in want of it, and suddenly thousands turned up,\
eh? Do you know, gentlemen, you\'92re both afraid now \'91what if he won\'92t tell\
us where he got it?\'92 That\'92s just how it is. I\'92m not going to tell you,\
gentlemen. You\'92ve guessed right. You\'92ll never know,\'94 said Mitya, chipping\
out each word with extraordinary determination. The lawyers were silent\
for a moment.\
\
\'93You must understand, Mr. Karamazov, that it is of vital importance for us\
to know,\'94 said Nikolay Parfenovitch, softly and suavely.\
\
\'93I understand; but still I won\'92t tell you.\'94\
\
The prosecutor, too, intervened, and again reminded the prisoner that he\
was at liberty to refuse to answer questions, if he thought it to his\
interest, and so on. But in view of the damage he might do himself by his\
silence, especially in a case of such importance as\'97\
\
\'93And so on, gentlemen, and so on. Enough! I\'92ve heard that rigmarole\
before,\'94 Mitya interrupted again. \'93I can see for myself how important it\
is, and that this is the vital point, and still I won\'92t say.\'94\
\
\'93What is it to us? It\'92s not our business, but yours. You are doing\
yourself harm,\'94 observed Nikolay Parfenovitch nervously.\
\
\'93You see, gentlemen, joking apart\'94\'97Mitya lifted his eyes and looked firmly\
at them both\'97\'93I had an inkling from the first that we should come to\
loggerheads at this point. But at first when I began to give my evidence,\
it was all still far away and misty; it was all floating, and I was so\
simple that I began with the supposition of mutual confidence existing\
between us. Now I can see for myself that such confidence is out of the\
question, for in any case we were bound to come to this cursed stumbling\uc0\u8208 \
block. And now we\'92ve come to it! It\'92s impossible and there\'92s an end of it!\
But I don\'92t blame you. You can\'92t believe it all simply on my word. I\
understand that, of course.\'94\
\
He relapsed into gloomy silence.\
\
\'93Couldn\'92t you, without abandoning your resolution to be silent about the\
chief point, could you not, at the same time, give us some slight hint as\
to the nature of the motives which are strong enough to induce you to\
refuse to answer, at a crisis so full of danger to you?\'94\
\
Mitya smiled mournfully, almost dreamily.\
\
\'93I\'92m much more good\uc0\u8208 natured than you think, gentlemen. I\'92ll tell you the\
reason why and give you that hint, though you don\'92t deserve it. I won\'92t\
speak of that, gentlemen, because it would be a stain on my honor. The\
answer to the question where I got the money would expose me to far\
greater disgrace than the murder and robbing of my father, if I had\
murdered and robbed him. That\'92s why I can\'92t tell you. I can\'92t for fear of\
disgrace. What, gentlemen, are you going to write that down?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, we\'92ll write it down,\'94 lisped Nikolay Parfenovitch.\
\
\'93You ought not to write that down about \'91disgrace.\'92 I only told you that\
in the goodness of my heart. I needn\'92t have told you. I made you a present\
of it, so to speak, and you pounce upon it at once. Oh, well, write\'97write\
what you like,\'94 he concluded, with scornful disgust. \'93I\'92m not afraid of\
you and I can still hold up my head before you.\'94\
\
\'93And can\'92t you tell us the nature of that disgrace?\'94 Nikolay Parfenovitch\
hazarded.\
\
The prosecutor frowned darkly.\
\
\'93No, no, _c\'92est fini_, don\'92t trouble yourselves. It\'92s not worth while\
soiling one\'92s hands. I have soiled myself enough through you as it is.\
You\'92re not worth it\'97no one is ... Enough, gentlemen. I\'92m not going on.\'94\
\
This was said too peremptorily. Nikolay Parfenovitch did not insist\
further, but from Ippolit Kirillovitch\'92s eyes he saw that he had not given\
up hope.\
\
\'93Can you not, at least, tell us what sum you had in your hands when you\
went into Mr. Perhotin\'92s\'97how many roubles exactly?\'94\
\
\'93I can\'92t tell you that.\'94\
\
\'93You spoke to Mr. Perhotin, I believe, of having received three thousand\
from Madame Hohlakov.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps I did. Enough, gentlemen. I won\'92t say how much I had.\'94\
\
\'93Will you be so good then as to tell us how you came here and what you\
have done since you arrived?\'94\
\
\'93Oh! you might ask the people here about that. But I\'92ll tell you if you\
like.\'94\
\
He proceeded to do so, but we won\'92t repeat his story. He told it dryly and\
curtly. Of the raptures of his love he said nothing, but told them that he\
abandoned his determination to shoot himself, owing to \'93new factors in the\
case.\'94 He told the story without going into motives or details. And this\
time the lawyers did not worry him much. It was obvious that there was no\
essential point of interest to them here.\
\
\'93We shall verify all that. We will come back to it during the examination\
of the witnesses, which will, of course, take place in your presence,\'94\
said Nikolay Parfenovitch in conclusion. \'93And now allow me to request you\
to lay on the table everything in your possession, especially all the\
money you still have about you.\'94\
\
\'93My money, gentlemen? Certainly. I understand that that is necessary. I\'92m\
surprised, indeed, that you haven\'92t inquired about it before. It\'92s true I\
couldn\'92t get away anywhere. I\'92m sitting here where I can be seen. But\
here\'92s my money\'97count it\'97take it. That\'92s all, I think.\'94\
\
He turned it all out of his pockets; even the small change\'97two pieces of\
twenty copecks\'97he pulled out of his waistcoat pocket. They counted the\
money, which amounted to eight hundred and thirty\uc0\u8208 six roubles, and forty\
copecks.\
\
\'93And is that all?\'94 asked the investigating lawyer.\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93You stated just now in your evidence that you spent three hundred roubles\
at Plotnikovs\'92. You gave Perhotin ten, your driver twenty, here you lost\
two hundred, then....\'94\
\
Nikolay Parfenovitch reckoned it all up. Mitya helped him readily. They\
recollected every farthing and included it in the reckoning. Nikolay\
Parfenovitch hurriedly added up the total.\
\
\'93With this eight hundred you must have had about fifteen hundred at\
first?\'94\
\
\'93I suppose so,\'94 snapped Mitya.\
\
\'93How is it they all assert there was much more?\'94\
\
\'93Let them assert it.\'94\
\
\'93But you asserted it yourself.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I did, too.\'94\
\
\'93We will compare all this with the evidence of other persons not yet\
examined. Don\'92t be anxious about your money. It will be properly taken\
care of and be at your disposal at the conclusion of ... what is beginning\
... if it appears, or, so to speak, is proved that you have undisputed\
right to it. Well, and now....\'94\
\
Nikolay Parfenovitch suddenly got up, and informed Mitya firmly that it\
was his duty and obligation to conduct a minute and thorough search \'93of\
your clothes and everything else....\'94\
\
\'93By all means, gentlemen. I\'92ll turn out all my pockets, if you like.\'94\
\
And he did, in fact, begin turning out his pockets.\
\
\'93It will be necessary to take off your clothes, too.\'94\
\
\'93What! Undress? Ugh! Damn it! Won\'92t you search me as I am! Can\'92t you?\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s utterly impossible, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. You must take off your\
clothes.\'94\
\
\'93As you like,\'94 Mitya submitted gloomily; \'93only, please, not here, but\
behind the curtains. Who will search them?\'94\
\
\'93Behind the curtains, of course.\'94\
\
Nikolay Parfenovitch bent his head in assent. His small face wore an\
expression of peculiar solemnity.\
\
\
\
Chapter VI. The Prosecutor Catches Mitya\
\
\
Something utterly unexpected and amazing to Mitya followed. He could\
never, even a minute before, have conceived that any one could behave like\
that to him, Mitya Karamazov. What was worst of all, there was something\
humiliating in it, and on their side something \'93supercilious and\
scornful.\'94 It was nothing to take off his coat, but he was asked to\
undress further, or rather not asked but \'93commanded,\'94 he quite understood\
that. From pride and contempt he submitted without a word. Several\
peasants accompanied the lawyers and remained on the same side of the\
curtain. \'93To be ready if force is required,\'94 thought Mitya, \'93and perhaps\
for some other reason, too.\'94\
\
\'93Well, must I take off my shirt, too?\'94 he asked sharply, but Nikolay\
Parfenovitch did not answer. He was busily engaged with the prosecutor in\
examining the coat, the trousers, the waistcoat and the cap; and it was\
evident that they were both much interested in the scrutiny. \'93They make no\
bones about it,\'94 thought Mitya, \'93they don\'92t keep up the most elementary\
politeness.\'94\
\
\'93I ask you for the second time\'97need I take off my shirt or not?\'94 he said,\
still more sharply and irritably.\
\
\'93Don\'92t trouble yourself. We will tell you what to do,\'94 Nikolay\
Parfenovitch said, and his voice was positively peremptory, or so it\
seemed to Mitya.\
\
Meantime a consultation was going on in undertones between the lawyers.\
There turned out to be on the coat, especially on the left side at the\
back, a huge patch of blood, dry, and still stiff. There were bloodstains\
on the trousers, too. Nikolay Parfenovitch, moreover, in the presence of\
the peasant witnesses, passed his fingers along the collar, the cuffs, and\
all the seams of the coat and trousers, obviously looking for\
something\'97money, of course. He didn\'92t even hide from Mitya his suspicion\
that he was capable of sewing money up in his clothes.\
\
\'93He treats me not as an officer but as a thief,\'94 Mitya muttered to\
himself. They communicated their ideas to one another with amazing\
frankness. The secretary, for instance, who was also behind the curtain,\
fussing about and listening, called Nikolay Parfenovitch\'92s attention to\
the cap, which they were also fingering.\
\
\'93You remember Gridyenko, the copying\uc0\u8208 clerk,\'94 observed the secretary. \'93Last\
summer he received the wages of the whole office, and pretended to have\
lost the money when he was drunk. And where was it found? Why, in just\
such pipings in his cap. The hundred\uc0\u8208 rouble notes were screwed up in\
little rolls and sewed in the piping.\'94\
\
Both the lawyers remembered Gridyenko\'92s case perfectly, and so laid aside\
Mitya\'92s cap, and decided that all his clothes must be more thoroughly\
examined later.\
\
\'93Excuse me,\'94 cried Nikolay Parfenovitch, suddenly, noticing that the right\
cuff of Mitya\'92s shirt was turned in, and covered with blood, \'93excuse me,\
what\'92s that, blood?\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 Mitya jerked out.\
\
\'93That is, what blood? ... and why is the cuff turned in?\'94\
\
Mitya told him how he had got the sleeve stained with blood looking after\
Grigory, and had turned it inside when he was washing his hands at\
Perhotin\'92s.\
\
\'93You must take off your shirt, too. That\'92s very important as material\
evidence.\'94\
\
Mitya flushed red and flew into a rage.\
\
\'93What, am I to stay naked?\'94 he shouted.\
\
\'93Don\'92t disturb yourself. We will arrange something. And meanwhile take off\
your socks.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92re not joking? Is that really necessary?\'94 Mitya\'92s eyes flashed.\
\
\'93We are in no mood for joking,\'94 answered Nikolay Parfenovitch sternly.\
\
\'93Well, if I must\'97\'94 muttered Mitya, and sitting down on the bed, he took\
off his socks. He felt unbearably awkward. All were clothed, while he was\
naked, and strange to say, when he was undressed he felt somehow guilty in\
their presence, and was almost ready to believe himself that he was\
inferior to them, and that now they had a perfect right to despise him.\
\
\'93When all are undressed, one is somehow not ashamed, but when one\'92s the\
only one undressed and everybody is looking, it\'92s degrading,\'94 he kept\
repeating to himself, again and again. \'93It\'92s like a dream, I\'92ve sometimes\
dreamed of being in such degrading positions.\'94 It was a misery to him to\
take off his socks. They were very dirty, and so were his underclothes,\
and now every one could see it. And what was worse, he disliked his feet.\
All his life he had thought both his big toes hideous. He particularly\
loathed the coarse, flat, crooked nail on the right one, and now they\
would all see it. Feeling intolerably ashamed made him, at once and\
intentionally, rougher. He pulled off his shirt, himself.\
\
\'93Would you like to look anywhere else if you\'92re not ashamed to?\'94\
\
\'93No, there\'92s no need to, at present.\'94\
\
\'93Well, am I to stay naked like this?\'94 he added savagely.\
\
\'93Yes, that can\'92t be helped for the time.... Kindly sit down here for a\
while. You can wrap yourself in a quilt from the bed, and I ... I\'92ll see\
to all this.\'94\
\
All the things were shown to the witnesses. The report of the search was\
drawn up, and at last Nikolay Parfenovitch went out, and the clothes were\
carried out after him. Ippolit Kirillovitch went out, too. Mitya was left\
alone with the peasants, who stood in silence, never taking their eyes off\
him. Mitya wrapped himself up in the quilt. He felt cold. His bare feet\
stuck out, and he couldn\'92t pull the quilt over so as to cover them.\
Nikolay Parfenovitch seemed to be gone a long time, \'93an insufferable\
time.\'94 \'93He thinks of me as a puppy,\'94 thought Mitya, gnashing his teeth.\
\'93That rotten prosecutor has gone, too, contemptuous no doubt, it disgusts\
him to see me naked!\'94\
\
Mitya imagined, however, that his clothes would be examined and returned\
to him. But what was his indignation when Nikolay Parfenovitch came back\
with quite different clothes, brought in behind him by a peasant.\
\
\'93Here are clothes for you,\'94 he observed airily, seeming well satisfied\
with the success of his mission. \'93Mr. Kalganov has kindly provided these\
for this unusual emergency, as well as a clean shirt. Luckily he had them\
all in his trunk. You can keep your own socks and underclothes.\'94\
\
Mitya flew into a passion.\
\
\'93I won\'92t have other people\'92s clothes!\'94 he shouted menacingly, \'93give me my\
own!\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s impossible!\'94\
\
\'93Give me my own. Damn Kalganov and his clothes, too!\'94\
\
It was a long time before they could persuade him. But they succeeded\
somehow in quieting him down. They impressed upon him that his clothes,\
being stained with blood, must be \'93included with the other material\
evidence,\'94 and that they \'93had not even the right to let him have them now\
... taking into consideration the possible outcome of the case.\'94 Mitya at\
last understood this. He subsided into gloomy silence and hurriedly\
dressed himself. He merely observed, as he put them on, that the clothes\
were much better than his old ones, and that he disliked \'93gaining by the\
change.\'94 The coat was, besides, \'93ridiculously tight. Am I to be dressed up\
like a fool ... for your amusement?\'94\
\
They urged upon him again that he was exaggerating, that Kalganov was only\
a little taller, so that only the trousers might be a little too long. But\
the coat turned out to be really tight in the shoulders.\
\
\'93Damn it all! I can hardly button it,\'94 Mitya grumbled. \'93Be so good as to\
tell Mr. Kalganov from me that I didn\'92t ask for his clothes, and it\'92s not\
my doing that they\'92ve dressed me up like a clown.\'94\
\
\'93He understands that, and is sorry ... I mean, not sorry to lend you his\
clothes, but sorry about all this business,\'94 mumbled Nikolay Parfenovitch.\
\
\'93Confound his sorrow! Well, where now? Am I to go on sitting here?\'94\
\
He was asked to go back to the \'93other room.\'94 Mitya went in, scowling with\
anger, and trying to avoid looking at any one. Dressed in another man\'92s\
clothes he felt himself disgraced, even in the eyes of the peasants, and\
of Trifon Borissovitch, whose face appeared, for some reason, in the\
doorway, and vanished immediately. \'93He\'92s come to look at me dressed up,\'94\
thought Mitya. He sat down on the same chair as before. He had an absurd\
nightmarish feeling, as though he were out of his mind.\
\
\'93Well, what now? Are you going to flog me? That\'92s all that\'92s left for\
you,\'94 he said, clenching his teeth and addressing the prosecutor. He would\
not turn to Nikolay Parfenovitch, as though he disdained to speak to him.\
\
\'93He looked too closely at my socks, and turned them inside out on purpose\
to show every one how dirty they were\'97the scoundrel!\'94\
\
\'93Well, now we must proceed to the examination of witnesses,\'94 observed\
Nikolay Parfenovitch, as though in reply to Mitya\'92s question.\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 said the prosecutor thoughtfully, as though reflecting on\
something.\
\
\'93We\'92ve done what we could in your interest, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94 Nikolay\
Parfenovitch went on, \'93but having received from you such an uncompromising\
refusal to explain to us the source from which you obtained the money\
found upon you, we are, at the present moment\'97\'94\
\
\'93What is the stone in your ring?\'94 Mitya interrupted suddenly, as though\
awakening from a reverie. He pointed to one of the three large rings\
adorning Nikolay Parfenovitch\'92s right hand.\
\
\'93Ring?\'94 repeated Nikolay Parfenovitch with surprise.\
\
\'93Yes, that one ... on your middle finger, with the little veins in it,\
what stone is that?\'94 Mitya persisted, like a peevish child.\
\
\'93That\'92s a smoky topaz,\'94 said Nikolay Parfenovitch, smiling. \'93Would you\
like to look at it? I\'92ll take it off ...\'94\
\
\'93No, don\'92t take it off,\'94 cried Mitya furiously, suddenly waking up, and\
angry with himself. \'93Don\'92t take it off ... there\'92s no need.... Damn it!...\
Gentlemen, you\'92ve sullied my heart! Can you suppose that I would conceal\
it from you, if I had really killed my father, that I would shuffle, lie,\
and hide myself? No, that\'92s not like Dmitri Karamazov, that he couldn\'92t\
do, and if I were guilty, I swear I shouldn\'92t have waited for your coming,\
or for the sunrise as I meant at first, but should have killed myself\
before this, without waiting for the dawn! I know that about myself now. I\
couldn\'92t have learnt so much in twenty years as I\'92ve found out in this\
accursed night!... And should I have been like this on this night, and at\
this moment, sitting with you, could I have talked like this, could I have\
moved like this, could I have looked at you and at the world like this, if\
I had really been the murderer of my father, when the very thought of\
having accidentally killed Grigory gave me no peace all night\'97not from\
fear\'97oh, not simply from fear of your punishment! The disgrace of it! And\
you expect me to be open with such scoffers as you, who see nothing and\
believe in nothing, blind moles and scoffers, and to tell you another\
nasty thing I\'92ve done, another disgrace, even if that would save me from\
your accusation! No, better Siberia! The man who opened the door to my\
father and went in at that door, he killed him, he robbed him. Who was he?\
I\'92m racking my brains and can\'92t think who. But I can tell you it was not\
Dmitri Karamazov, and that\'92s all I can tell you, and that\'92s enough,\
enough, leave me alone.... Exile me, punish me, but don\'92t bother me any\
more. I\'92ll say no more. Call your witnesses!\'94\
\
Mitya uttered his sudden monologue as though he were determined to be\
absolutely silent for the future. The prosecutor watched him the whole\
time and only when he had ceased speaking, observed, as though it were the\
most ordinary thing, with the most frigid and composed air:\
\
\'93Oh, about the open door of which you spoke just now, we may as well\
inform you, by the way, now, of a very interesting piece of evidence of\
the greatest importance both to you and to us, that has been given us by\
Grigory, the old man you wounded. On his recovery, he clearly and\
emphatically stated, in reply to our questions, that when, on coming out\
to the steps, and hearing a noise in the garden, he made up his mind to go\
into it through the little gate which stood open, before he noticed you\
running, as you have told us already, in the dark from the open window\
where you saw your father, he, Grigory, glanced to the left, and, while\
noticing the open window, observed at the same time, much nearer to him,\
the door, standing wide open\'97that door which you have stated to have been\
shut the whole time you were in the garden. I will not conceal from you\
that Grigory himself confidently affirms and bears witness that you must\
have run from that door, though, of course, he did not see you do so with\
his own eyes, since he only noticed you first some distance away in the\
garden, running towards the fence.\'94\
\
Mitya had leapt up from his chair half\uc0\u8208 way through this speech.\
\
\'93Nonsense!\'94 he yelled, in a sudden frenzy, \'93it\'92s a barefaced lie. He\
couldn\'92t have seen the door open because it was shut. He\'92s lying!\'94\
\
\'93I consider it my duty to repeat that he is firm in his statement. He does\
not waver. He adheres to it. We\'92ve cross\uc0\u8208 examined him several times.\'94\
\
\'93Precisely. I have cross\uc0\u8208 examined him several times,\'94 Nikolay Parfenovitch\
confirmed warmly.\
\
\'93It\'92s false, false! It\'92s either an attempt to slander me, or the\
hallucination of a madman,\'94 Mitya still shouted. \'93He\'92s simply raving, from\
loss of blood, from the wound. He must have fancied it when he came to....\
He\'92s raving.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, but he noticed the open door, not when he came to after his\
injuries, but before that, as soon as he went into the garden from the\
lodge.\'94\
\
\'93But it\'92s false, it\'92s false! It can\'92t be so! He\'92s slandering me from\
spite.... He couldn\'92t have seen it ... I didn\'92t come from the door,\'94\
gasped Mitya.\
\
The prosecutor turned to Nikolay Parfenovitch and said to him\
impressively:\
\
\'93Confront him with it.\'94\
\
\'93Do you recognize this object?\'94\
\
Nikolay Parfenovitch laid upon the table a large and thick official\
envelope, on which three seals still remained intact. The envelope was\
empty, and slit open at one end. Mitya stared at it with open eyes.\
\
\'93It ... it must be that envelope of my father\'92s, the envelope that\
contained the three thousand roubles ... and if there\'92s inscribed on it,\
allow me, \'91For my little chicken\'92 ... yes\'97three thousand!\'94 he shouted, \'93do\
you see, three thousand, do you see?\'94\
\
\'93Of course, we see. But we didn\'92t find the money in it. It was empty, and\
lying on the floor by the bed, behind the screen.\'94\
\
For some seconds Mitya stood as though thunderstruck.\
\
\'93Gentlemen, it\'92s Smerdyakov!\'94 he shouted suddenly, at the top of his\
voice. \'93It\'92s he who\'92s murdered him! He\'92s robbed him! No one else knew\
where the old man hid the envelope. It\'92s Smerdyakov, that\'92s clear, now!\'94\
\
\'93But you, too, knew of the envelope and that it was under the pillow.\'94\
\
\'93I never knew it. I\'92ve never seen it. This is the first time I\'92ve looked\
at it. I\'92d only heard of it from Smerdyakov.... He was the only one who\
knew where the old man kept it hidden, I didn\'92t know ...\'94 Mitya was\
completely breathless.\
\
\'93But you told us yourself that the envelope was under your deceased\
father\'92s pillow. You especially stated that it was under the pillow, so\
you must have known it.\'94\
\
\'93We\'92ve got it written down,\'94 confirmed Nikolay Parfenovitch.\
\
\'93Nonsense! It\'92s absurd! I\'92d no idea it was under the pillow. And perhaps\
it wasn\'92t under the pillow at all.... It was just a chance guess that it\
was under the pillow. What does Smerdyakov say? Have you asked him where\
it was? What does Smerdyakov say? that\'92s the chief point.... And I went\
out of my way to tell lies against myself.... I told you without thinking\
that it was under the pillow, and now you\'97 Oh, you know how one says the\
wrong thing, without meaning it. No one knew but Smerdyakov, only\
Smerdyakov, and no one else.... He didn\'92t even tell me where it was! But\
it\'92s his doing, his doing; there\'92s no doubt about it, he murdered him,\
that\'92s as clear as daylight now,\'94 Mitya exclaimed more and more\
frantically, repeating himself incoherently, and growing more and more\
exasperated and excited. \'93You must understand that, and arrest him at\
once.... He must have killed him while I was running away and while\
Grigory was unconscious, that\'92s clear now.... He gave the signal and\
father opened to him ... for no one but he knew the signal, and without\
the signal father would never have opened the door....\'94\
\
\'93But you\'92re again forgetting the circumstance,\'94 the prosecutor observed,\
still speaking with the same restraint, though with a note of triumph,\
\'93that there was no need to give the signal if the door already stood open\
when you were there, while you were in the garden....\'94\
\
\'93The door, the door,\'94 muttered Mitya, and he stared speechless at the\
prosecutor. He sank back helpless in his chair. All were silent.\
\
\'93Yes, the door!... It\'92s a nightmare! God is against me!\'94 he exclaimed,\
staring before him in complete stupefaction.\
\
\'93Come, you see,\'94 the prosecutor went on with dignity, \'93and you can judge\
for yourself, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. On the one hand we have the evidence of\
the open door from which you ran out, a fact which overwhelms you and us.\
On the other side your incomprehensible, persistent, and, so to speak,\
obdurate silence with regard to the source from which you obtained the\
money which was so suddenly seen in your hands, when only three hours\
earlier, on your own showing, you pledged your pistols for the sake of ten\
roubles! In view of all these facts, judge for yourself. What are we to\
believe, and what can we depend upon? And don\'92t accuse us of being\
\'91frigid, cynical, scoffing people,\'92 who are incapable of believing in the\
generous impulses of your heart.... Try to enter into our position ...\'94\
\
Mitya was indescribably agitated. He turned pale.\
\
\'93Very well!\'94 he exclaimed suddenly. \'93I will tell you my secret. I\'92ll tell\
you where I got the money!... I\'92ll reveal my shame, that I may not have to\
blame myself or you hereafter.\'94\
\
\'93And believe me, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94 put in Nikolay Parfenovitch, in a\
voice of almost pathetic delight, \'93that every sincere and complete\
confession on your part at this moment may, later on, have an immense\
influence in your favor, and may, indeed, moreover\'97\'94\
\
But the prosecutor gave him a slight shove under the table, and he checked\
himself in time. Mitya, it is true, had not heard him.\
\
\
\
Chapter VII. Mitya\'92s Great Secret. Received With Hisses\
\
\
\'93Gentlemen,\'94 he began, still in the same agitation, \'93I want to make a full\
confession: that money was _my own_.\'94 The lawyers\'92 faces lengthened. That\
was not at all what they expected.\
\
\'93How do you mean?\'94 faltered Nikolay Parfenovitch, \'93when at five o\'92clock on\
the same day, from your own confession\'97\'94\
\
\'93Damn five o\'92clock on the same day and my own confession! That\'92s nothing\
to do with it now! That money was my own, my own, that is, stolen by me\
... not mine, I mean, but stolen by me, and it was fifteen hundred\
roubles, and I had it on me all the time, all the time ...\'94\
\
\'93But where did you get it?\'94\
\
\'93I took it off my neck, gentlemen, off this very neck ... it was here,\
round my neck, sewn up in a rag, and I\'92d had it round my neck a long time,\
it\'92s a month since I put it round my neck ... to my shame and disgrace!\'94\
\
\'93And from whom did you ... appropriate it?\'94\
\
\'93You mean, \'91steal it\'92? Speak out plainly now. Yes, I consider that I\
practically stole it, but, if you prefer, I \'91appropriated it.\'92 I consider\
I stole it. And last night I stole it finally.\'94\
\
\'93Last night? But you said that it\'92s a month since you ... obtained it?...\'94\
\
\'93Yes. But not from my father. Not from my father, don\'92t be uneasy. I\
didn\'92t steal it from my father, but from her. Let me tell you without\
interrupting. It\'92s hard to do, you know. You see, a month ago, I was sent\
for by Katerina Ivanovna, formerly my betrothed. Do you know her?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, of course.\'94\
\
\'93I know you know her. She\'92s a noble creature, noblest of the noble. But\
she has hated me ever so long, oh, ever so long ... and hated me with good\
reason, good reason!\'94\
\
\'93Katerina Ivanovna!\'94 Nikolay Parfenovitch exclaimed with wonder. The\
prosecutor, too, stared.\
\
\'93Oh, don\'92t take her name in vain! I\'92m a scoundrel to bring her into it.\
Yes, I\'92ve seen that she hated me ... a long while.... From the very first,\
even that evening at my lodging ... but enough, enough. You\'92re unworthy\
even to know of that. No need of that at all.... I need only tell you that\
she sent for me a month ago, gave me three thousand roubles to send off to\
her sister and another relation in Moscow (as though she couldn\'92t have\
sent it off herself!) and I ... it was just at that fatal moment in my\
life when I ... well, in fact, when I\'92d just come to love another, her,\
she\'92s sitting down below now, Grushenka. I carried her off here to Mokroe\
then, and wasted here in two days half that damned three thousand, but the\
other half I kept on me. Well, I\'92ve kept that other half, that fifteen\
hundred, like a locket round my neck, but yesterday I undid it, and spent\
it. What\'92s left of it, eight hundred roubles, is in your hands now,\
Nikolay Parfenovitch. That\'92s the change out of the fifteen hundred I had\
yesterday.\'94\
\
\'93Excuse me. How\'92s that? Why, when you were here a month ago you spent\
three thousand, not fifteen hundred, everybody knows that.\'94\
\
\'93Who knows it? Who counted the money? Did I let any one count it?\'94\
\
\'93Why, you told every one yourself that you\'92d spent exactly three\
thousand.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s true, I did. I told the whole town so, and the whole town said so.\
And here, at Mokroe, too, every one reckoned it was three thousand. Yet I\
didn\'92t spend three thousand, but fifteen hundred. And the other fifteen\
hundred I sewed into a little bag. That\'92s how it was, gentlemen. That\'92s\
where I got that money yesterday....\'94\
\
\'93This is almost miraculous,\'94 murmured Nikolay Parfenovitch.\
\
\'93Allow me to inquire,\'94 observed the prosecutor at last, \'93have you informed\
any one whatever of this circumstance before, I mean that you had fifteen\
hundred left about you a month ago?\'94\
\
\'93I told no one.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s strange. Do you mean absolutely no one?\'94\
\
\'93Absolutely no one. No one and nobody.\'94\
\
\'93What was your reason for this reticence? What was your motive for making\
such a secret of it? To be more precise: You have told us at last your\
secret, in your words, so \'91disgraceful,\'92 though in reality\'97that is, of\
course, comparatively speaking\'97this action, that is, the appropriation of\
three thousand roubles belonging to some one else, and, of course, only\
for a time is, in my view at least, only an act of the greatest\
recklessness and not so disgraceful, when one takes into consideration\
your character.... Even admitting that it was an action in the highest\
degree discreditable, still, discreditable is not \'91disgraceful.\'92... Many\
people have already guessed, during this last month, about the three\
thousand of Katerina Ivanovna\'92s, that you have spent, and I heard the\
legend myself, apart from your confession.... Mihail Makarovitch, for\
instance, had heard it, too, so that indeed, it was scarcely a legend, but\
the gossip of the whole town. There are indications, too, if I am not\
mistaken, that you confessed this yourself to some one, I mean that the\
money was Katerina Ivanovna\'92s, and so, it\'92s extremely surprising to me\
that hitherto, that is, up to the present moment, you have made such an\
extraordinary secret of the fifteen hundred you say you put by, apparently\
connecting a feeling of positive horror with that secret.... It\'92s not easy\
to believe that it could cost you such distress to confess such a\
secret.... You cried out, just now, that Siberia would be better than\
confessing it ...\'94\
\
The prosecutor ceased speaking. He was provoked. He did not conceal his\
vexation, which was almost anger, and gave vent to all his accumulated\
spleen, disconnectedly and incoherently, without choosing words.\
\
\'93It\'92s not the fifteen hundred that\'92s the disgrace, but that I put it apart\
from the rest of the three thousand,\'94 said Mitya firmly.\
\
\'93Why?\'94 smiled the prosecutor irritably. \'93What is there disgraceful, to\
your thinking, in your having set aside half of the three thousand you had\
discreditably, if you prefer, \'91disgracefully,\'92 appropriated? Your taking\
the three thousand is more important than what you did with it. And by the\
way, why did you do that\'97why did you set apart that half, for what\
purpose, for what object did you do it? Can you explain that to us?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, gentlemen, the purpose is the whole point!\'94 cried Mitya. \'93I put it\
aside because I was vile, that is, because I was calculating, and to be\
calculating in such a case is vile ... and that vileness has been going on\
a whole month.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s incomprehensible.\'94\
\
\'93I wonder at you. But I\'92ll make it clearer. Perhaps it really is\
incomprehensible. You see, attend to what I say. I appropriate three\
thousand entrusted to my honor, I spend it on a spree, say I spend it all,\
and next morning I go to her and say, \'91Katya, I\'92ve done wrong, I\'92ve\
squandered your three thousand,\'92 well, is that right? No, it\'92s not\
right\'97it\'92s dishonest and cowardly, I\'92m a beast, with no more self\uc0\u8208 control\
than a beast, that\'92s so, isn\'92t it? But still I\'92m not a thief? Not a\
downright thief, you\'92ll admit! I squandered it, but I didn\'92t steal it. Now\
a second, rather more favorable alternative: follow me carefully, or I may\
get confused again\'97my head\'92s going round\'97and so, for the second\
alternative: I spend here only fifteen hundred out of the three thousand,\
that is, only half. Next day I go and take that half to her: \'91Katya, take\
this fifteen hundred from me, I\'92m a low beast, and an untrustworthy\
scoundrel, for I\'92ve wasted half the money, and I shall waste this, too, so\
keep me from temptation!\'92 Well, what of that alternative? I should be a\
beast and a scoundrel, and whatever you like; but not a thief, not\
altogether a thief, or I should not have brought back what was left, but\
have kept that, too. She would see at once that since I brought back half,\
I should pay back what I\'92d spent, that I should never give up trying to,\
that I should work to get it and pay it back. So in that case I should be\
a scoundrel, but not a thief, you may say what you like, not a thief!\'94\
\
\'93I admit that there is a certain distinction,\'94 said the prosecutor, with a\
cold smile. \'93But it\'92s strange that you see such a vital difference.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I see a vital difference! Every man may be a scoundrel, and perhaps\
every man is a scoundrel, but not every one can be a thief, it takes an\
arch\uc0\u8208 scoundrel to be that. Oh, of course, I don\'92t know how to make these\
fine distinctions ... but a thief is lower than a scoundrel, that\'92s my\
conviction. Listen, I carry the money about me a whole month, I may make\
up my mind to give it back to\uc0\u8208 morrow, and I\'92m a scoundrel no longer, but I\
cannot make up my mind, you see, though I\'92m making up my mind every day,\
and every day spurring myself on to do it, and yet for a whole month I\
can\'92t bring myself to it, you see. Is that right to your thinking, is that\
right?\'94\
\
\'93Certainly, that\'92s not right, that I can quite understand, and that I\
don\'92t dispute,\'94 answered the prosecutor with reserve. \'93And let us give up\
all discussion of these subtleties and distinctions, and, if you will be\
so kind, get back to the point. And the point is, that you have still not\
told us, altogether we\'92ve asked you, why, in the first place, you halved\
the money, squandering one half and hiding the other? For what purpose\
exactly did you hide it, what did you mean to do with that fifteen\
hundred? I insist upon that question, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, of course!\'94 cried Mitya, striking himself on the forehead; \'93forgive\
me, I\'92m worrying you, and am not explaining the chief point, or you\'92d\
understand in a minute, for it\'92s just the motive of it that\'92s the\
disgrace! You see, it was all to do with the old man, my dead father. He\
was always pestering Agrafena Alexandrovna, and I was jealous; I thought\
then that she was hesitating between me and him. So I kept thinking every\
day, suppose she were to make up her mind all of a sudden, suppose she\
were to leave off tormenting me, and were suddenly to say to me, \'91I love\
you, not him; take me to the other end of the world.\'92 And I\'92d only forty\
copecks; how could I take her away, what could I do? Why, I\'92d be lost. You\
see, I didn\'92t know her then, I didn\'92t understand her, I thought she wanted\
money, and that she wouldn\'92t forgive my poverty. And so I fiendishly\
counted out the half of that three thousand, sewed it up, calculating on\
it, sewed it up before I was drunk, and after I had sewn it up, I went off\
to get drunk on the rest. Yes, that was base. Do you understand now?\'94\
\
Both the lawyers laughed aloud.\
\
\'93I should have called it sensible and moral on your part not to have\
squandered it all,\'94 chuckled Nikolay Parfenovitch, \'93for after all what\
does it amount to?\'94\
\
\'93Why, that I stole it, that\'92s what it amounts to! Oh, God, you horrify me\
by not understanding! Every day that I had that fifteen hundred sewn up\
round my neck, every day and every hour I said to myself, \'91You\'92re a thief!\
you\'92re a thief!\'92 Yes, that\'92s why I\'92ve been so savage all this month,\
that\'92s why I fought in the tavern, that\'92s why I attacked my father, it was\
because I felt I was a thief. I couldn\'92t make up my mind, I didn\'92t dare\
even to tell Alyosha, my brother, about that fifteen hundred: I felt I was\
such a scoundrel and such a pickpocket. But, do you know, while I carried\
it I said to myself at the same time every hour: \'91No, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\
you may yet not be a thief.\'92 Why? Because I might go next day and pay back\
that fifteen hundred to Katya. And only yesterday I made up my mind to\
tear my amulet off my neck, on my way from Fenya\'92s to Perhotin. I hadn\'92t\
been able till that moment to bring myself to it. And it was only when I\
tore it off that I became a downright thief, a thief and a dishonest man\
for the rest of my life. Why? Because, with that I destroyed, too, my\
dream of going to Katya and saying, \'91I\'92m a scoundrel, but not a thief!\'92 Do\
you understand now? Do you understand?\'94\
\
\'93What was it made you decide to do it yesterday?\'94 Nikolay Parfenovitch\
interrupted.\
\
\'93Why? It\'92s absurd to ask. Because I had condemned myself to die at five\
o\'92clock this morning, here, at dawn. I thought it made no difference\
whether I died a thief or a man of honor. But I see it\'92s not so, it turns\
out that it does make a difference. Believe me, gentlemen, what has\
tortured me most during this night has not been the thought that I\'92d\
killed the old servant, and that I was in danger of Siberia just when my\
love was being rewarded, and Heaven was open to me again. Oh, that did\
torture me, but not in the same way: not so much as the damned\
consciousness that I had torn that damned money off my breast at last and\
spent it, and had become a downright thief! Oh, gentlemen, I tell you\
again, with a bleeding heart, I have learnt a great deal this night. I\
have learnt that it\'92s not only impossible to live a scoundrel, but\
impossible to die a scoundrel.... No, gentlemen, one must die honest....\'94\
\
Mitya was pale. His face had a haggard and exhausted look, in spite of his\
being intensely excited.\
\
\'93I am beginning to understand you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94 the prosecutor\
said slowly, in a soft and almost compassionate tone. \'93But all this, if\
you\'92ll excuse my saying so, is a matter of nerves, in my opinion ... your\
overwrought nerves, that\'92s what it is. And why, for instance, should you\
not have saved yourself such misery for almost a month, by going and\
returning that fifteen hundred to the lady who had entrusted it to you?\
And why could you not have explained things to her, and in view of your\
position, which you describe as being so awful, why could you not have had\
recourse to the plan which would so naturally have occurred to one\'92s mind,\
that is, after honorably confessing your errors to her, why could you not\
have asked her to lend you the sum needed for your expenses, which, with\
her generous heart, she would certainly not have refused you in your\
distress, especially if it had been with some guarantee, or even on the\
security you offered to the merchant Samsonov, and to Madame Hohlakov? I\
suppose you still regard that security as of value?\'94\
\
Mitya suddenly crimsoned.\
\
\'93Surely you don\'92t think me such an out and out scoundrel as that? You\
can\'92t be speaking in earnest?\'94 he said, with indignation, looking the\
prosecutor straight in the face, and seeming unable to believe his ears.\
\
\'93I assure you I\'92m in earnest.... Why do you imagine I\'92m not serious?\'94 It\
was the prosecutor\'92s turn to be surprised.\
\
\'93Oh, how base that would have been! Gentlemen, do you know, you are\
torturing me! Let me tell you everything, so be it. I\'92ll confess all my\
infernal wickedness, but to put you to shame, and you\'92ll be surprised\
yourselves at the depth of ignominy to which a medley of human passions\
can sink. You must know that I already had that plan myself, that plan you\
spoke of, just now, prosecutor! Yes, gentlemen, I, too, have had that\
thought in my mind all this current month, so that I was on the point of\
deciding to go to Katya\'97I was mean enough for that. But to go to her, to\
tell her of my treachery, and for that very treachery, to carry it out,\
for the expenses of that treachery, to beg for money from her, Katya (to\
beg, do you hear, to beg), and go straight from her to run away with the\
other, the rival, who hated and insulted her\'97to think of it! You must be\
mad, prosecutor!\'94\
\
\'93Mad I am not, but I did speak in haste, without thinking ... of that\
feminine jealousy ... if there could be jealousy in this case, as you\
assert ... yes, perhaps there is something of the kind,\'94 said the\
prosecutor, smiling.\
\
\'93But that would have been so infamous!\'94 Mitya brought his fist down on the\
table fiercely. \'93That would have been filthy beyond everything! Yes, do\
you know that she might have given me that money, yes, and she would have\
given it, too; she\'92d have been certain to give it, to be revenged on me,\
she\'92d have given it to satisfy her vengeance, to show her contempt for me,\
for hers is an infernal nature, too, and she\'92s a woman of great wrath. I\'92d\
have taken the money, too, oh, I should have taken it; I should have taken\
it, and then, for the rest of my life ... oh, God! Forgive me, gentlemen,\
I\'92m making such an outcry because I\'92ve had that thought in my mind so\
lately, only the day before yesterday, that night when I was having all\
that bother with Lyagavy, and afterwards yesterday, all day yesterday, I\
remember, till that happened ...\'94\
\
\'93Till what happened?\'94 put in Nikolay Parfenovitch inquisitively, but Mitya\
did not hear it.\
\
\'93I have made you an awful confession,\'94 Mitya said gloomily in conclusion.\
\'93You must appreciate it, and what\'92s more, you must respect it, for if not,\
if that leaves your souls untouched, then you\'92ve simply no respect for me,\
gentlemen, I tell you that, and I shall die of shame at having confessed\
it to men like you! Oh, I shall shoot myself! Yes, I see, I see already\
that you don\'92t believe me. What, you want to write that down, too?\'94 he\
cried in dismay.\
\
\'93Yes, what you said just now,\'94 said Nikolay Parfenovitch, looking at him\
in surprise, \'93that is, that up to the last hour you were still\
contemplating going to Katerina Ivanovna to beg that sum from her.... I\
assure you, that\'92s a very important piece of evidence for us, Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch, I mean for the whole case ... and particularly for you,\
particularly important for you.\'94\
\
\'93Have mercy, gentlemen!\'94 Mitya flung up his hands. \'93Don\'92t write that,\
anyway; have some shame. Here I\'92ve torn my heart asunder before you, and\
you seize the opportunity and are fingering the wounds in both halves....\
Oh, my God!\'94\
\
In despair he hid his face in his hands.\
\
\'93Don\'92t worry yourself so, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94 observed the prosecutor,\
\'93everything that is written down will be read over to you afterwards, and\
what you don\'92t agree to we\'92ll alter as you like. But now I\'92ll ask you one\
little question for the second time. Has no one, absolutely no one, heard\
from you of that money you sewed up? That, I must tell you, is almost\
impossible to believe.\'94\
\
\'93No one, no one, I told you so before, or you\'92ve not understood anything!\
Let me alone!\'94\
\
\'93Very well, this matter is bound to be explained, and there\'92s plenty of\
time for it, but meantime, consider; we have perhaps a dozen witnesses\
that you yourself spread it abroad, and even shouted almost everywhere\
about the three thousand you\'92d spent here; three thousand, not fifteen\
hundred. And now, too, when you got hold of the money you had yesterday,\
you gave many people to understand that you had brought three thousand\
with you.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ve got not dozens, but hundreds of witnesses, two hundred witnesses,\
two hundred have heard it, thousands have heard it!\'94 cried Mitya.\
\
\'93Well, you see, all bear witness to it. And the word _all_ means\
something.\'94\
\
\'93It means nothing. I talked rot, and every one began repeating it.\'94\
\
\'93But what need had you to \'91talk rot,\'92 as you call it?\'94\
\
\'93The devil knows. From bravado perhaps ... at having wasted so much\
money.... To try and forget that money I had sewn up, perhaps ... yes,\
that was why ... damn it ... how often will you ask me that question?\
Well, I told a fib, and that was the end of it, once I\'92d said it, I didn\'92t\
care to correct it. What does a man tell lies for sometimes?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s very difficult to decide, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, what makes a man\
tell lies,\'94 observed the prosecutor impressively. \'93Tell me, though, was\
that \'91amulet,\'92 as you call it, on your neck, a big thing?\'94\
\
\'93No, not big.\'94\
\
\'93How big, for instance?\'94\
\
\'93If you fold a hundred\uc0\u8208 rouble note in half, that would be the size.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92d better show us the remains of it. You must have them somewhere.\'94\
\
\'93Damnation, what nonsense! I don\'92t know where they are.\'94\
\
\'93But excuse me: where and when did you take it off your neck? According to\
your own evidence you didn\'92t go home.\'94\
\
\'93When I was going from Fenya\'92s to Perhotin\'92s, on the way I tore it off my\
neck and took out the money.\'94\
\
\'93In the dark?\'94\
\
\'93What should I want a light for? I did it with my fingers in one minute.\'94\
\
\'93Without scissors, in the street?\'94\
\
\'93In the market\uc0\u8208 place I think it was. Why scissors? It was an old rag. It\
was torn in a minute.\'94\
\
\'93Where did you put it afterwards?\'94\
\
\'93I dropped it there.\'94\
\
\'93Where was it, exactly?\'94\
\
\'93In the market\uc0\u8208 place, in the market\u8208 place! The devil knows whereabouts.\
What do you want to know for?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s extremely important, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. It would be material\
evidence in your favor. How is it you don\'92t understand that? Who helped\
you to sew it up a month ago?\'94\
\
\'93No one helped me. I did it myself.\'94\
\
\'93Can you sew?\'94\
\
\'93A soldier has to know how to sew. No knowledge was needed to do that.\'94\
\
\'93Where did you get the material, that is, the rag in which you sewed the\
money?\'94\
\
\'93Are you laughing at me?\'94\
\
\'93Not at all. And we are in no mood for laughing, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know where I got the rag from\'97somewhere, I suppose.\'94\
\
\'93I should have thought you couldn\'92t have forgotten it?\'94\
\
\'93Upon my word, I don\'92t remember. I might have torn a bit off my linen.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s very interesting. We might find in your lodgings to\uc0\u8208 morrow the\
shirt or whatever it is from which you tore the rag. What sort of rag was\
it, cloth or linen?\'94\
\
\'93Goodness only knows what it was. Wait a bit.... I believe I didn\'92t tear\
it off anything. It was a bit of calico.... I believe I sewed it up in a\
cap of my landlady\'92s.\'94\
\
\'93In your landlady\'92s cap?\'94\
\
\'93Yes. I took it from her.\'94\
\
\'93How did you get it?\'94\
\
\'93You see, I remember once taking a cap for a rag, perhaps to wipe my pen\
on. I took it without asking, because it was a worthless rag. I tore it\
up, and I took the notes and sewed them up in it. I believe it was in that\
very rag I sewed them. An old piece of calico, washed a thousand times.\'94\
\
\'93And you remember that for certain now?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know whether for certain. I think it was in the cap. But, hang\
it, what does it matter?\'94\
\
\'93In that case your landlady will remember that the thing was lost?\'94\
\
\'93No, she won\'92t, she didn\'92t miss it. It was an old rag, I tell you, an old\
rag not worth a farthing.\'94\
\
\'93And where did you get the needle and thread?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll stop now. I won\'92t say any more. Enough of it!\'94 said Mitya, losing\
his temper at last.\
\
\'93It\'92s strange that you should have so completely forgotten where you threw\
the pieces in the market\uc0\u8208 place.\'94\
\
\'93Give orders for the market\uc0\u8208 place to be swept to\u8208 morrow, and perhaps\
you\'92ll find it,\'94 said Mitya, sneering. \'93Enough, gentlemen, enough!\'94 he\
decided, in an exhausted voice. \'93I see you don\'92t believe me! Not for a\
moment! It\'92s my fault, not yours. I ought not to have been so ready. Why,\
why did I degrade myself by confessing my secret to you? It\'92s a joke to\
you. I see that from your eyes. You led me on to it, prosecutor? Sing a\
hymn of triumph if you can.... Damn you, you torturers!\'94\
\
He bent his head, and hid his face in his hands. The lawyers were silent.\
A minute later he raised his head and looked at them almost vacantly. His\
face now expressed complete, hopeless despair, and he sat mute and passive\
as though hardly conscious of what was happening. In the meantime they had\
to finish what they were about. They had immediately to begin examining\
the witnesses. It was by now eight o\'92clock in the morning. The lights had\
been extinguished long ago. Mihail Makarovitch and Kalganov, who had been\
continually in and out of the room all the while the interrogation had\
been going on, had now both gone out again. The lawyers, too, looked very\
tired. It was a wretched morning, the whole sky was overcast, and the rain\
streamed down in bucketfuls. Mitya gazed blankly out of the window.\
\
\'93May I look out of the window?\'94 he asked Nikolay Parfenovitch, suddenly.\
\
\'93Oh, as much as you like,\'94 the latter replied.\
\
Mitya got up and went to the window.... The rain lashed against its little\
greenish panes. He could see the muddy road just below the house, and\
farther away, in the rain and mist, a row of poor, black, dismal huts,\
looking even blacker and poorer in the rain. Mitya thought of \'93Ph\'9cbus the\
golden\uc0\u8208 haired,\'94 and how he had meant to shoot himself at his first ray.\
\'93Perhaps it would be even better on a morning like this,\'94 he thought with\
a smile, and suddenly, flinging his hand downwards, he turned to his\
\'93torturers.\'94\
\
\'93Gentlemen,\'94 he cried, \'93I see that I am lost! But she? Tell me about her,\
I beseech you. Surely she need not be ruined with me? She\'92s innocent, you\
know, she was out of her mind when she cried last night \'91It\'92s all my\
fault!\'92 She\'92s done nothing, nothing! I\'92ve been grieving over her all night\
as I sat with you.... Can\'92t you, won\'92t you tell me what you are going to\
do with her now?\'94\
\
\'93You can set your mind quite at rest on that score, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94\
the prosecutor answered at once, with evident alacrity. \'93We have, so far,\
no grounds for interfering with the lady in whom you are so interested. I\
trust that it may be the same in the later development of the case.... On\
the contrary, we\'92ll do everything that lies in our power in that matter.\
Set your mind completely at rest.\'94\
\
\'93Gentlemen, I thank you. I knew that you were honest, straight\uc0\u8208 forward\
people in spite of everything. You\'92ve taken a load off my heart.... Well,\
what are we to do now? I\'92m ready.\'94\
\
\'93Well, we ought to make haste. We must pass to examining the witnesses\
without delay. That must be done in your presence and therefore\'97\'94\
\
\'93Shouldn\'92t we have some tea first?\'94 interposed Nikolay Parfenovitch, \'93I\
think we\'92ve deserved it!\'94\
\
They decided that if tea were ready downstairs (Mihail Makarovitch had, no\
doubt, gone down to get some) they would have a glass and then \'93go on and\
on,\'94 putting off their proper breakfast until a more favorable\
opportunity. Tea really was ready below, and was soon brought up. Mitya at\
first refused the glass that Nikolay Parfenovitch politely offered him,\
but afterwards he asked for it himself and drank it greedily. He looked\
surprisingly exhausted. It might have been supposed from his Herculean\
strength that one night of carousing, even accompanied by the most violent\
emotions, could have had little effect on him. But he felt that he could\
hardly hold his head up, and from time to time all the objects about him\
seemed heaving and dancing before his eyes. \'93A little more and I shall\
begin raving,\'94 he said to himself.\
\
\
\
Chapter VIII. The Evidence Of The Witnesses. The Babe\
\
\
The examination of the witnesses began. But we will not continue our story\
in such detail as before. And so we will not dwell on how Nikolay\
Parfenovitch impressed on every witness called that he must give his\
evidence in accordance with truth and conscience, and that he would\
afterwards have to repeat his evidence on oath, how every witness was\
called upon to sign the protocol of his evidence, and so on. We will only\
note that the point principally insisted upon in the examination was the\
question of the three thousand roubles, that is, was the sum spent here,\
at Mokroe, by Mitya on the first occasion, a month before, three thousand\
or fifteen hundred? And again had he spent three thousand or fifteen\
hundred yesterday? Alas, all the evidence given by every one turned out to\
be against Mitya. There was not one in his favor, and some witnesses\
introduced new, almost crushing facts, in contradiction of his, Mitya\'92s,\
story.\
\
The first witness examined was Trifon Borissovitch. He was not in the\
least abashed as he stood before the lawyers. He had, on the contrary, an\
air of stern and severe indignation with the accused, which gave him an\
appearance of truthfulness and personal dignity. He spoke little, and with\
reserve, waited to be questioned, answered precisely and deliberately.\
Firmly and unhesitatingly he bore witness that the sum spent a month\
before could not have been less than three thousand, that all the peasants\
about here would testify that they had heard the sum of three thousand\
mentioned by Dmitri Fyodorovitch himself. \'93What a lot of money he flung\
away on the gypsy girls alone! He wasted a thousand, I daresay, on them\
alone.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t believe I gave them five hundred,\'94 was Mitya\'92s gloomy comment on\
this. \'93It\'92s a pity I didn\'92t count the money at the time, but I was\
drunk....\'94\
\
Mitya was sitting sideways with his back to the curtains. He listened\
gloomily, with a melancholy and exhausted air, as though he would say:\
\
\'93Oh, say what you like. It makes no difference now.\'94\
\
\'93More than a thousand went on them, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,\'94 retorted Trifon\
Borissovitch firmly. \'93You flung it about at random and they picked it up.\
They were a rascally, thievish lot, horse\uc0\u8208 stealers, they\'92ve been driven\
away from here, or maybe they\'92d bear witness themselves how much they got\
from you. I saw the sum in your hands, myself\'97count it I didn\'92t, you\
didn\'92t let me, that\'92s true enough\'97but by the look of it I should say it\
was far more than fifteen hundred ... fifteen hundred, indeed! We\'92ve seen\
money too. We can judge of amounts....\'94\
\
As for the sum spent yesterday he asserted that Dmitri Fyodorovitch had\
told him, as soon as he arrived, that he had brought three thousand with\
him.\
\
\'93Come now, is that so, Trifon Borissovitch?\'94 replied Mitya. \'93Surely I\
didn\'92t declare so positively that I\'92d brought three thousand?\'94\
\
\'93You did say so, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. You said it before Andrey. Andrey\
himself is still here. Send for him. And in the hall, when you were\
treating the chorus, you shouted straight out that you would leave your\
sixth thousand here\'97that is with what you spent before, we must\
understand. Stepan and Semyon heard it, and Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov, too,\
was standing beside you at the time. Maybe he\'92d remember it....\'94\
\
The evidence as to the \'93sixth\'94 thousand made an extraordinary impression\
on the two lawyers. They were delighted with this new mode of reckoning;\
three and three made six, three thousand then and three now made six, that\
was clear.\
\
They questioned all the peasants suggested by Trifon Borissovitch, Stepan\
and Semyon, the driver Andrey, and Kalganov. The peasants and the driver\
unhesitatingly confirmed Trifon Borissovitch\'92s evidence. They noted down,\
with particular care, Andrey\'92s account of the conversation he had had with\
Mitya on the road: \'93 \'91Where,\'92 says he, \'91am I, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, going,\
to heaven or to hell, and shall I be forgiven in the next world or not?\'92 \'94\
\
The psychological Ippolit Kirillovitch heard this with a subtle smile, and\
ended by recommending that these remarks as to where Dmitri Fyodorovitch\
would go should be \'93included in the case.\'94\
\
Kalganov, when called, came in reluctantly, frowning and ill\uc0\u8208 humored, and\
he spoke to the lawyers as though he had never met them before in his\
life, though they were acquaintances whom he had been meeting every day\
for a long time past. He began by saying that \'93he knew nothing about it\
and didn\'92t want to.\'94 But it appeared that he had heard of the \'93sixth\'94\
thousand, and he admitted that he had been standing close by at the\
moment. As far as he could see he \'93didn\'92t know\'94 how much money Mitya had\
in his hands. He affirmed that the Poles had cheated at cards. In reply to\
reiterated questions he stated that, after the Poles had been turned out,\
Mitya\'92s position with Agrafena Alexandrovna had certainly improved, and\
that she had said that she loved him. He spoke of Agrafena Alexandrovna\
with reserve and respect, as though she had been a lady of the best\
society, and did not once allow himself to call her Grushenka. In spite of\
the young man\'92s obvious repugnance at giving evidence, Ippolit\
Kirillovitch examined him at great length, and only from him learnt all\
the details of what made up Mitya\'92s \'93romance,\'94 so to say, on that night.\
Mitya did not once pull Kalganov up. At last they let the young man go,\
and he left the room with unconcealed indignation.\
\
The Poles, too, were examined. Though they had gone to bed in their room,\
they had not slept all night, and on the arrival of the police officers\
they hastily dressed and got ready, realizing that they would certainly be\
sent for. They gave their evidence with dignity, though not without some\
uneasiness. The little Pole turned out to be a retired official of the\
twelfth class, who had served in Siberia as a veterinary surgeon. His name\
was Mussyalovitch. Pan Vrublevsky turned out to be an uncertificated\
dentist. Although Nikolay Parfenovitch asked them questions on entering\
the room they both addressed their answers to Mihail Makarovitch, who was\
standing on one side, taking him in their ignorance for the most important\
person and in command, and addressed him at every word as \'93Pan Colonel.\'94\
Only after several reproofs from Mihail Makarovitch himself, they grasped\
that they had to address their answers to Nikolay Parfenovitch only. It\
turned out that they could speak Russian quite correctly except for their\
accent in some words. Of his relations with Grushenka, past and present,\
Pan Mussyalovitch spoke proudly and warmly, so that Mitya was roused at\
once and declared that he would not allow the \'93scoundrel\'94 to speak like\
that in his presence! Pan Mussyalovitch at once called attention to the\
word \'93scoundrel\'94 and begged that it should be put down in the protocol.\
Mitya fumed with rage.\
\
\'93He\'92s a scoundrel! A scoundrel! You can put that down. And put down, too,\
that, in spite of the protocol I still declare that he\'92s a scoundrel!\'94 he\
cried.\
\
Though Nikolay Parfenovitch did insert this in the protocol, he showed the\
most praiseworthy tact and management. After sternly reprimanding Mitya,\
he cut short all further inquiry into the romantic aspect of the case, and\
hastened to pass to what was essential. One piece of evidence given by the\
Poles roused special interest in the lawyers: that was how, in that very\
room, Mitya had tried to buy off Pan Mussyalovitch, and had offered him\
three thousand roubles to resign his claims, seven hundred roubles down,\
and the remaining two thousand three hundred \'93to be paid next day in the\
town.\'94 He had sworn at the time that he had not the whole sum with him at\
Mokroe, but that his money was in the town. Mitya observed hotly that he\
had not said that he would be sure to pay him the remainder next day in\
the town. But Pan Vrublevsky confirmed the statement, and Mitya, after\
thinking for a moment admitted, frowning, that it must have been as the\
Poles stated, that he had been excited at the time, and might indeed have\
said so.\
\
The prosecutor positively pounced on this piece of evidence. It seemed to\
establish for the prosecution (and they did, in fact, base this deduction\
on it) that half, or a part of, the three thousand that had come into\
Mitya\'92s hands might really have been left somewhere hidden in the town, or\
even, perhaps, somewhere here, in Mokroe. This would explain the\
circumstance, so baffling for the prosecution, that only eight hundred\
roubles were to be found in Mitya\'92s hands. This circumstance had been the\
one piece of evidence which, insignificant as it was, had hitherto told,\
to some extent, in Mitya\'92s favor. Now this one piece of evidence in his\
favor had broken down. In answer to the prosecutor\'92s inquiry, where he\
would have got the remaining two thousand three hundred roubles, since he\
himself had denied having more than fifteen hundred, Mitya confidently\
replied that he had meant to offer the \'93little chap,\'94 not money, but a\
formal deed of conveyance of his rights to the village of Tchermashnya,\
those rights which he had already offered to Samsonov and Madame Hohlakov.\
The prosecutor positively smiled at the \'93innocence of this subterfuge.\'94\
\
\'93And you imagine he would have accepted such a deed as a substitute for\
two thousand three hundred roubles in cash?\'94\
\
\'93He certainly would have accepted it,\'94 Mitya declared warmly. \'93Why, look\
here, he might have grabbed not two thousand, but four or six, for it. He\
would have put his lawyers, Poles and Jews, on to the job, and might have\
got, not three thousand, but the whole property out of the old man.\'94\
\
The evidence of Pan Mussyalovitch was, of course, entered in the protocol\
in the fullest detail. Then they let the Poles go. The incident of the\
cheating at cards was hardly touched upon. Nikolay Parfenovitch was too\
well pleased with them, as it was, and did not want to worry them with\
trifles, moreover, it was nothing but a foolish, drunken quarrel over\
cards. There had been drinking and disorder enough, that night.... So the\
two hundred roubles remained in the pockets of the Poles.\
\
Then old Maximov was summoned. He came in timidly, approached with little\
steps, looking very disheveled and depressed. He had, all this time, taken\
refuge below with Grushenka, sitting dumbly beside her, and \'93now and then\
he\'92d begin blubbering over her and wiping his eyes with a blue check\
handkerchief,\'94 as Mihail Makarovitch described afterwards. So that she\
herself began trying to pacify and comfort him. The old man at once\
confessed that he had done wrong, that he had borrowed \'93ten roubles in my\
poverty,\'94 from Dmitri Fyodorovitch, and that he was ready to pay it back.\
To Nikolay Parfenovitch\'92s direct question, had he noticed how much money\
Dmitri Fyodorovitch held in his hand, as he must have been able to see the\
sum better than any one when he took the note from him, Maximov, in the\
most positive manner, declared that there was twenty thousand.\
\
\'93Have you ever seen so much as twenty thousand before, then?\'94 inquired\
Nikolay Parfenovitch, with a smile.\
\
\'93To be sure I have, not twenty, but seven, when my wife mortgaged my\
little property. She\'92d only let me look at it from a distance, boasting of\
it to me. It was a very thick bundle, all rainbow\uc0\u8208 colored notes. And\
Dmitri Fyodorovitch\'92s were all rainbow\uc0\u8208 colored....\'94\
\
He was not kept long. At last it was Grushenka\'92s turn. Nikolay\
Parfenovitch was obviously apprehensive of the effect her appearance might\
have on Mitya, and he muttered a few words of admonition to him, but Mitya\
bowed his head in silence, giving him to understand \'93that he would not\
make a scene.\'94 Mihail Makarovitch himself led Grushenka in. She entered\
with a stern and gloomy face, that looked almost composed and sat down\
quietly on the chair offered her by Nikolay Parfenovitch. She was very\
pale, she seemed to be cold, and wrapped herself closely in her\
magnificent black shawl. She was suffering from a slight feverish\
chill\'97the first symptom of the long illness which followed that night. Her\
grave air, her direct earnest look and quiet manner made a very favorable\
impression on every one. Nikolay Parfenovitch was even a little bit\
\'93fascinated.\'94 He admitted himself, when talking about it afterwards, that\
only then had he seen \'93how handsome the woman was,\'94 for, though he had\
seen her several times before, he had always looked upon her as something\
of a \'93provincial hetaira.\'94 \'93She has the manners of the best society,\'94 he\
said enthusiastically, gossiping about her in a circle of ladies. But this\
was received with positive indignation by the ladies, who immediately\
called him a \'93naughty man,\'94 to his great satisfaction.\
\
As she entered the room, Grushenka only glanced for an instant at Mitya,\
who looked at her uneasily. But her face reassured him at once. After the\
first inevitable inquiries and warnings, Nikolay Parfenovitch asked her,\
hesitating a little, but preserving the most courteous manner, on what\
terms she was with the retired lieutenant, Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov.\
To this Grushenka firmly and quietly replied:\
\
\'93He was an acquaintance. He came to see me as an acquaintance during the\
last month.\'94 To further inquisitive questions she answered plainly and\
with complete frankness, that, though \'93at times\'94 she had thought him\
attractive, she had not loved him, but had won his heart as well as his\
old father\'92s \'93in my nasty spite,\'94 that she had seen that Mitya was very\
jealous of Fyodor Pavlovitch and every one else; but that had only amused\
her. She had never meant to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch, she had simply been\
laughing at him. \'93I had no thoughts for either of them all this last\
month. I was expecting another man who had wronged me. But I think,\'94 she\
said in conclusion, \'93that there\'92s no need for you to inquire about that,\
nor for me to answer you, for that\'92s my own affair.\'94\
\
Nikolay Parfenovitch immediately acted upon this hint. He again dismissed\
the \'93romantic\'94 aspect of the case and passed to the serious one, that is,\
to the question of most importance, concerning the three thousand roubles.\
Grushenka confirmed the statement that three thousand roubles had\
certainly been spent on the first carousal at Mokroe, and, though she had\
not counted the money herself, she had heard that it was three thousand\
from Dmitri Fyodorovitch\'92s own lips.\
\
\'93Did he tell you that alone, or before some one else, or did you only hear\
him speak of it to others in your presence?\'94 the prosecutor inquired\
immediately.\
\
To which Grushenka replied that she had heard him say so before other\
people, and had heard him say so when they were alone.\
\
\'93Did he say it to you alone once, or several times?\'94 inquired the\
prosecutor, and learned that he had told Grushenka so several times.\
\
Ippolit Kirillovitch was very well satisfied with this piece of evidence.\
Further examination elicited that Grushenka knew, too, where that money\
had come from, and that Dmitri Fyodorovitch had got it from Katerina\
Ivanovna.\
\
\'93And did you never, once, hear that the money spent a month ago was not\
three thousand, but less, and that Dmitri Fyodorovitch had saved half that\
sum for his own use?\'94\
\
\'93No, I never heard that,\'94 answered Grushenka.\
\
It was explained further that Mitya had, on the contrary, often told her\
that he hadn\'92t a farthing.\
\
\'93He was always expecting to get some from his father,\'94 said Grushenka in\
conclusion.\
\
\'93Did he never say before you ... casually, or in a moment of irritation,\'94\
Nikolay Parfenovitch put in suddenly, \'93that he intended to make an attempt\
on his father\'92s life?\'94\
\
\'93Ach, he did say so,\'94 sighed Grushenka.\
\
\'93Once or several times?\'94\
\
\'93He mentioned it several times, always in anger.\'94\
\
\'93And did you believe he would do it?\'94\
\
\'93No, I never believed it,\'94 she answered firmly. \'93I had faith in his noble\
heart.\'94\
\
\'93Gentlemen, allow me,\'94 cried Mitya suddenly, \'93allow me to say one word to\
Agrafena Alexandrovna, in your presence.\'94\
\
\'93You can speak,\'94 Nikolay Parfenovitch assented.\
\
\'93Agrafena Alexandrovna!\'94 Mitya got up from his chair, \'93have faith in God\
and in me. I am not guilty of my father\'92s murder!\'94\
\
Having uttered these words Mitya sat down again on his chair. Grushenka\
stood up and crossed herself devoutly before the ikon. \'93Thanks be to Thee,\
O Lord,\'94 she said, in a voice thrilled with emotion, and still standing,\
she turned to Nikolay Parfenovitch and added:\
\
\'93As he has spoken now, believe it! I know him. He\'92ll say anything as a\
joke or from obstinacy, but he\'92ll never deceive you against his\
conscience. He\'92s telling the whole truth, you may believe it.\'94\
\
\'93Thanks, Agrafena Alexandrovna, you\'92ve given me fresh courage,\'94 Mitya\
responded in a quivering voice.\
\
As to the money spent the previous day, she declared that she did not know\
what sum it was, but had heard him tell several people that he had three\
thousand with him. And to the question where he got the money, she said\
that he had told her that he had \'93stolen\'94 it from Katerina Ivanovna, and\
that she had replied to that that he hadn\'92t stolen it, and that he must\
pay the money back next day. On the prosecutor\'92s asking her emphatically\
whether the money he said he had stolen from Katerina Ivanovna was what he\
had spent yesterday, or what he had squandered here a month ago, she\
declared that he meant the money spent a month ago, and that that was how\
she understood him.\
\
Grushenka was at last released, and Nikolay Parfenovitch informed her\
impulsively that she might at once return to the town and that if he could\
be of any assistance to her, with horses for example, or if she would care\
for an escort, he ... would be\'97\
\
\'93I thank you sincerely,\'94 said Grushenka, bowing to him, \'93I\'92m going with\
this old gentleman, I am driving him back to town with me, and meanwhile,\
if you\'92ll allow me, I\'92ll wait below to hear what you decide about Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch.\'94\
\
She went out. Mitya was calm, and even looked more cheerful, but only for\
a moment. He felt more and more oppressed by a strange physical weakness.\
His eyes were closing with fatigue. The examination of the witnesses was,\
at last, over. They proceeded to a final revision of the protocol. Mitya\
got up, moved from his chair to the corner by the curtain, lay down on a\
large chest covered with a rug, and instantly fell asleep.\
\
He had a strange dream, utterly out of keeping with the place and the\
time.\
\
He was driving somewhere in the steppes, where he had been stationed long\
ago, and a peasant was driving him in a cart with a pair of horses,\
through snow and sleet. He was cold, it was early in November, and the\
snow was falling in big wet flakes, melting as soon as it touched the\
earth. And the peasant drove him smartly, he had a fair, long beard. He\
was not an old man, somewhere about fifty, and he had on a gray peasant\'92s\
smock. Not far off was a village, he could see the black huts, and half\
the huts were burnt down, there were only the charred beams sticking up.\
And as they drove in, there were peasant women drawn up along the road, a\
lot of women, a whole row, all thin and wan, with their faces a sort of\
brownish color, especially one at the edge, a tall, bony woman, who looked\
forty, but might have been only twenty, with a long thin face. And in her\
arms was a little baby crying. And her breasts seemed so dried up that\
there was not a drop of milk in them. And the child cried and cried, and\
held out its little bare arms, with its little fists blue from cold.\
\
\'93Why are they crying? Why are they crying?\'94 Mitya asked, as they dashed\
gayly by.\
\
\'93It\'92s the babe,\'94 answered the driver, \'93the babe weeping.\'94\
\
And Mitya was struck by his saying, in his peasant way, \'93the babe,\'94 and he\
liked the peasant\'92s calling it a \'93babe.\'94 There seemed more pity in it.\
\
\'93But why is it weeping?\'94 Mitya persisted stupidly, \'93why are its little\
arms bare? Why don\'92t they wrap it up?\'94\
\
\'93The babe\'92s cold, its little clothes are frozen and don\'92t warm it.\'94\
\
\'93But why is it? Why?\'94 foolish Mitya still persisted.\
\
\'93Why, they\'92re poor people, burnt out. They\'92ve no bread. They\'92re begging\
because they\'92ve been burnt out.\'94\
\
\'93No, no,\'94 Mitya, as it were, still did not understand. \'93Tell me why it is\
those poor mothers stand there? Why are people poor? Why is the babe poor?\
Why is the steppe barren? Why don\'92t they hug each other and kiss? Why\
don\'92t they sing songs of joy? Why are they so dark from black misery? Why\
don\'92t they feed the babe?\'94\
\
And he felt that, though his questions were unreasonable and senseless,\
yet he wanted to ask just that, and he had to ask it just in that way. And\
he felt that a passion of pity, such as he had never known before, was\
rising in his heart, that he wanted to cry, that he wanted to do something\
for them all, so that the babe should weep no more, so that the dark\uc0\u8208 \
faced, dried\uc0\u8208 up mother should not weep, that no one should shed tears\
again from that moment, and he wanted to do it at once, at once,\
regardless of all obstacles, with all the recklessness of the Karamazovs.\
\
\'93And I\'92m coming with you. I won\'92t leave you now for the rest of my life,\
I\'92m coming with you,\'94 he heard close beside him Grushenka\'92s tender voice,\
thrilling with emotion. And his heart glowed, and he struggled forward\
towards the light, and he longed to live, to live, to go on and on,\
towards the new, beckoning light, and to hasten, hasten, now, at once!\
\
\'93What! Where?\'94 he exclaimed opening his eyes, and sitting up on the chest,\
as though he had revived from a swoon, smiling brightly. Nikolay\
Parfenovitch was standing over him, suggesting that he should hear the\
protocol read aloud and sign it. Mitya guessed that he had been asleep an\
hour or more, but he did not hear Nikolay Parfenovitch. He was suddenly\
struck by the fact that there was a pillow under his head, which hadn\'92t\
been there when he had leant back, exhausted, on the chest.\
\
\'93Who put that pillow under my head? Who was so kind?\'94 he cried, with a\
sort of ecstatic gratitude, and tears in his voice, as though some great\
kindness had been shown him.\
\
He never found out who this kind man was; perhaps one of the peasant\
witnesses, or Nikolay Parfenovitch\'92s little secretary, had compassionately\
thought to put a pillow under his head; but his whole soul was quivering\
with tears. He went to the table and said that he would sign whatever they\
liked.\
\
\'93I\'92ve had a good dream, gentlemen,\'94 he said in a strange voice, with a new\
light, as of joy, in his face.\
\
\
\
Chapter IX. They Carry Mitya Away\
\
\
When the protocol had been signed, Nikolay Parfenovitch turned solemnly to\
the prisoner and read him the \'93Committal,\'94 setting forth, that in such a\
year, on such a day, in such a place, the investigating lawyer of such\uc0\u8208 \
and\uc0\u8208 such a district court, having examined so\u8208 and\u8208 so (to wit, Mitya)\
accused of this and of that (all the charges were carefully written out)\
and having considered that the accused, not pleading guilty to the charges\
made against him, had brought forward nothing in his defense, while the\
witnesses, so\uc0\u8208 and\u8208 so, and so\u8208 and\u8208 so, and the circumstances such\u8208 and\u8208 such\
testify against him, acting in accordance with such\uc0\u8208 and\u8208 such articles of\
the Statute Book, and so on, has ruled, that, in order to preclude so\uc0\u8208 and\u8208 \
so (Mitya) from all means of evading pursuit and judgment he be detained\
in such\uc0\u8208 and\u8208 such a prison, which he hereby notifies to the accused and\
communicates a copy of this same \'93Committal\'94 to the deputy prosecutor, and\
so on, and so on.\
\
In brief, Mitya was informed that he was, from that moment, a prisoner,\
and that he would be driven at once to the town, and there shut up in a\
very unpleasant place. Mitya listened attentively, and only shrugged his\
shoulders.\
\
\'93Well, gentlemen, I don\'92t blame you. I\'92m ready.... I understand that\
there\'92s nothing else for you to do.\'94\
\
Nikolay Parfenovitch informed him gently that he would be escorted at once\
by the rural police officer, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch, who happened to be on\
the spot....\
\
\'93Stay,\'94 Mitya interrupted, suddenly, and impelled by uncontrollable\
feeling he pronounced, addressing all in the room:\
\
\'93Gentlemen, we\'92re all cruel, we\'92re all monsters, we all make men weep, and\
mothers, and babes at the breast, but of all, let it be settled here, now,\
of all I am the lowest reptile! I\'92ve sworn to amend, and every day I\'92ve\
done the same filthy things. I understand now that such men as I need a\
blow, a blow of destiny to catch them as with a noose, and bind them by a\
force from without. Never, never should I have risen of myself! But the\
thunderbolt has fallen. I accept the torture of accusation, and my public\
shame, I want to suffer and by suffering I shall be purified. Perhaps I\
shall be purified, gentlemen? But listen, for the last time, I am not\
guilty of my father\'92s blood. I accept my punishment, not because I killed\
him, but because I meant to kill him, and perhaps I really might have\
killed him. Still I mean to fight it out with you. I warn you of that.\
I\'92ll fight it out with you to the end, and then God will decide. Good\uc0\u8208 by,\
gentlemen, don\'92t be vexed with me for having shouted at you during the\
examination. Oh, I was still such a fool then.... In another minute I\
shall be a prisoner, but now, for the last time, as a free man, Dmitri\
Karamazov offers you his hand. Saying good\uc0\u8208 by to you, I say it to all\
men.\'94\
\
His voice quivered and he stretched out his hand, but Nikolay\
Parfenovitch, who happened to stand nearest to him, with a sudden, almost\
nervous movement, hid his hands behind his back. Mitya instantly noticed\
this, and started. He let his outstretched hand fall at once.\
\
\'93The preliminary inquiry is not yet over,\'94 Nikolay Parfenovitch faltered,\
somewhat embarrassed. \'93We will continue it in the town, and I, for my\
part, of course, am ready to wish you all success ... in your defense....\
As a matter of fact, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, I\'92ve always been disposed to\
regard you as, so to speak, more unfortunate than guilty. All of us here,\
if I may make bold to speak for all, we are all ready to recognize that\
you are, at bottom, a young man of honor, but, alas, one who has been\
carried away by certain passions to a somewhat excessive degree....\'94\
\
Nikolay Parfenovitch\'92s little figure was positively majestic by the time\
he had finished speaking. It struck Mitya that in another minute this\
\'93boy\'94 would take his arm, lead him to another corner, and renew their\
conversation about \'93girls.\'94 But many quite irrelevant and inappropriate\
thoughts sometimes occur even to a prisoner when he is being led out to\
execution.\
\
\'93Gentlemen, you are good, you are humane, may I see _her_ to say \'91good\uc0\u8208 by\'92\
for the last time?\'94 asked Mitya.\
\
\'93Certainly, but considering ... in fact, now it\'92s impossible except in the\
presence of\'97\'94\
\
\'93Oh, well, if it must be so, it must!\'94\
\
Grushenka was brought in, but the farewell was brief, and of few words,\
and did not at all satisfy Nikolay Parfenovitch. Grushenka made a deep bow\
to Mitya.\
\
\'93I have told you I am yours, and I will be yours. I will follow you for\
ever, wherever they may send you. Farewell; you are guiltless, though\
you\'92ve been your own undoing.\'94\
\
Her lips quivered, tears flowed from her eyes.\
\
\'93Forgive me, Grusha, for my love, for ruining you, too, with my love.\'94\
\
Mitya would have said something more, but he broke off and went out. He\
was at once surrounded by men who kept a constant watch on him. At the\
bottom of the steps to which he had driven up with such a dash the day\
before with Andrey\'92s three horses, two carts stood in readiness. Mavriky\
Mavrikyevitch, a sturdy, thick\uc0\u8208 set man with a wrinkled face, was annoyed\
about something, some sudden irregularity. He was shouting angrily. He\
asked Mitya to get into the cart with somewhat excessive surliness.\
\
\'93When I stood him drinks in the tavern, the man had quite a different\
face,\'94 thought Mitya, as he got in. At the gates there was a crowd of\
people, peasants, women and drivers. Trifon Borissovitch came down the\
steps too. All stared at Mitya.\
\
\'93Forgive me at parting, good people!\'94 Mitya shouted suddenly from the\
cart.\
\
\'93Forgive us too!\'94 he heard two or three voices.\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by to you, too, Trifon Borissovitch!\'94\
\
But Trifon Borissovitch did not even turn round. He was, perhaps, too\
busy. He, too, was shouting and fussing about something. It appeared that\
everything was not yet ready in the second cart, in which two constables\
were to accompany Mavriky Mavrikyevitch. The peasant who had been ordered\
to drive the second cart was pulling on his smock, stoutly maintaining\
that it was not his turn to go, but Akim\'92s. But Akim was not to be seen.\
They ran to look for him. The peasant persisted and besought them to wait.\
\
\'93You see what our peasants are, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch. They\'92ve no shame!\'94\
exclaimed Trifon Borissovitch. \'93Akim gave you twenty\uc0\u8208 five copecks the day\
before yesterday. You\'92ve drunk it all and now you cry out. I\'92m simply\
surprised at your good\uc0\u8208 nature, with our low peasants, Mavriky\
Mavrikyevitch, that\'92s all I can say.\'94\
\
\'93But what do we want a second cart for?\'94 Mitya put in. \'93Let\'92s start with\
the one, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch. I won\'92t be unruly, I won\'92t run away from\
you, old fellow. What do we want an escort for?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll trouble you, sir, to learn how to speak to me if you\'92ve never been\
taught. I\'92m not \'91old fellow\'92 to you, and you can keep your advice for\
another time!\'94 Mavriky Mavrikyevitch snapped out savagely, as though glad\
to vent his wrath.\
\
Mitya was reduced to silence. He flushed all over. A moment later he felt\
suddenly very cold. The rain had ceased, but the dull sky was still\
overcast with clouds, and a keen wind was blowing straight in his face.\
\
\'93I\'92ve taken a chill,\'94 thought Mitya, twitching his shoulders.\
\
At last Mavriky Mavrikyevitch, too, got into the cart, sat down heavily,\
and, as though without noticing it, squeezed Mitya into the corner. It is\
true that he was out of humor and greatly disliked the task that had been\
laid upon him.\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by, Trifon Borissovitch!\'94 Mitya shouted again, and felt himself,\
that he had not called out this time from good\uc0\u8208 nature, but involuntarily,\
from resentment.\
\
But Trifon Borissovitch stood proudly, with both hands behind his back,\
and staring straight at Mitya with a stern and angry face, he made no\
reply.\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, good\u8208 by!\'94 he heard all at once the voice of\
Kalganov, who had suddenly darted out. Running up to the cart he held out\
his hand to Mitya. He had no cap on.\
\
Mitya had time to seize and press his hand.\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by, dear fellow! I shan\'92t forget your generosity,\'94 he cried warmly.\
\
But the cart moved and their hands parted. The bell began ringing and\
Mitya was driven off.\
\
Kalganov ran back, sat down in a corner, bent his head, hid his face in\
his hands, and burst out crying. For a long while he sat like that, crying\
as though he were a little boy instead of a young man of twenty. Oh, he\
believed almost without doubt in Mitya\'92s guilt.\
\
\'93What are these people? What can men be after this?\'94 he exclaimed\
incoherently, in bitter despondency, almost despair. At that moment he had\
no desire to live.\
\
\'93Is it worth it? Is it worth it?\'94 exclaimed the boy in his grief.\
\
\
\
\
\
PART IV\
\
\
\
\
Book X. The Boys\
\
\
\
Chapter I. Kolya Krassotkin\
\
\
It was the beginning of November. There had been a hard frost, eleven\
degrees R\'e9aumur, without snow, but a little dry snow had fallen on the\
frozen ground during the night, and a keen dry wind was lifting and\
blowing it along the dreary streets of our town, especially about the\
market\uc0\u8208 place. It was a dull morning, but the snow had ceased.\
\
Not far from the market\uc0\u8208 place, close to Plotnikov\'92s shop, there stood a\
small house, very clean both without and within. It belonged to Madame\
Krassotkin, the widow of a former provincial secretary, who had been dead\
for fourteen years. His widow, still a nice\uc0\u8208 looking woman of thirty\u8208 two,\
was living in her neat little house on her private means. She lived in\
respectable seclusion; she was of a soft but fairly cheerful disposition.\
She was about eighteen at the time of her husband\'92s death; she had been\
married only a year and had just borne him a son. From the day of his\
death she had devoted herself heart and soul to the bringing up of her\
precious treasure, her boy Kolya. Though she had loved him passionately\
those fourteen years, he had caused her far more suffering than happiness.\
She had been trembling and fainting with terror almost every day, afraid\
he would fall ill, would catch cold, do something naughty, climb on a\
chair and fall off it, and so on and so on. When Kolya began going to\
school, the mother devoted herself to studying all the sciences with him\
so as to help him, and go through his lessons with him. She hastened to\
make the acquaintance of the teachers and their wives, even made up to\
Kolya\'92s schoolfellows, and fawned upon them in the hope of thus saving\
Kolya from being teased, laughed at, or beaten by them. She went so far\
that the boys actually began to mock at him on her account and taunt him\
with being a \'93mother\'92s darling.\'94\
\
But the boy could take his own part. He was a resolute boy, \'93tremendously\
strong,\'94 as was rumored in his class, and soon proved to be the fact; he\
was agile, strong\uc0\u8208 willed, and of an audacious and enterprising temper. He\
was good at lessons, and there was a rumor in the school that he could\
beat the teacher, Dardanelov, at arithmetic and universal history. Though\
he looked down upon every one, he was a good comrade and not supercilious.\
He accepted his schoolfellows\'92 respect as his due, but was friendly with\
them. Above all, he knew where to draw the line. He could restrain himself\
on occasion, and in his relations with the teachers he never overstepped\
that last mystic limit beyond which a prank becomes an unpardonable breach\
of discipline. But he was as fond of mischief on every possible occasion\
as the smallest boy in the school, and not so much for the sake of\
mischief as for creating a sensation, inventing something, something\
effective and conspicuous. He was extremely vain. He knew how to make even\
his mother give way to him; he was almost despotic in his control of her.\
She gave way to him, oh, she had given way to him for years. The one\
thought unendurable to her was that her boy had no great love for her. She\
was always fancying that Kolya was \'93unfeeling\'94 to her, and at times,\
dissolving into hysterical tears, she used to reproach him with his\
coldness. The boy disliked this, and the more demonstrations of feeling\
were demanded of him the more he seemed intentionally to avoid them. Yet\
it was not intentional on his part but instinctive\'97it was his character.\
His mother was mistaken; he was very fond of her. He only disliked\
\'93sheepish sentimentality,\'94 as he expressed it in his schoolboy language.\
\
There was a bookcase in the house containing a few books that had been his\
father\'92s. Kolya was fond of reading, and had read several of them by\
himself. His mother did not mind that and only wondered sometimes at\
seeing the boy stand for hours by the bookcase poring over a book instead\
of going to play. And in that way Kolya read some things unsuitable for\
his age.\
\
Though the boy, as a rule, knew where to draw the line in his mischief, he\
had of late begun to play pranks that caused his mother serious alarm. It\
is true there was nothing vicious in what he did, but a wild mad\
recklessness.\
\
It happened that July, during the summer holidays, that the mother and son\
went to another district, forty\uc0\u8208 five miles away, to spend a week with a\
distant relation, whose husband was an official at the railway station\
(the very station, the nearest one to our town, from which a month later\
Ivan Fyodorovitch Karamazov set off for Moscow). There Kolya began by\
carefully investigating every detail connected with the railways, knowing\
that he could impress his schoolfellows when he got home with his newly\
acquired knowledge. But there happened to be some other boys in the place\
with whom he soon made friends. Some of them were living at the station,\
others in the neighborhood; there were six or seven of them, all between\
twelve and fifteen, and two of them came from our town. The boys played\
together, and on the fourth or fifth day of Kolya\'92s stay at the station, a\
mad bet was made by the foolish boys. Kolya, who was almost the youngest\
of the party and rather looked down upon by the others in consequence, was\
moved by vanity or by reckless bravado to bet them two roubles that he\
would lie down between the rails at night when the eleven o\'92clock train\
was due, and would lie there without moving while the train rolled over\
him at full speed. It is true they made a preliminary investigation, from\
which it appeared that it was possible to lie so flat between the rails\
that the train could pass over without touching, but to lie there was no\
joke! Kolya maintained stoutly that he would. At first they laughed at\
him, called him a little liar, a braggart, but that only egged him on.\
What piqued him most was that these boys of fifteen turned up their noses\
at him too superciliously, and were at first disposed to treat him as \'93a\
small boy,\'94 not fit to associate with them, and that was an unendurable\
insult.\
\
And so it was resolved to go in the evening, half a mile from the station,\
so that the train might have time to get up full speed after leaving the\
station. The boys assembled. It was a pitch\uc0\u8208 dark night without a moon. At\
the time fixed, Kolya lay down between the rails. The five others who had\
taken the bet waited among the bushes below the embankment, their hearts\
beating with suspense, which was followed by alarm and remorse. At last\
they heard in the distance the rumble of the train leaving the station.\
Two red lights gleamed out of the darkness; the monster roared as it\
approached.\
\
\'93Run, run away from the rails,\'94 the boys cried to Kolya from the bushes,\
breathless with terror. But it was too late: the train darted up and flew\
past. The boys rushed to Kolya. He lay without moving. They began pulling\
at him, lifting him up. He suddenly got up and walked away without a word.\
Then he explained that he had lain there as though he were insensible to\
frighten them, but the fact was that he really had lost consciousness, as\
he confessed long after to his mother. In this way his reputation as \'93a\
desperate character,\'94 was established for ever. He returned home to the\
station as white as a sheet. Next day he had a slight attack of nervous\
fever, but he was in high spirits and well pleased with himself. The\
incident did not become known at once, but when they came back to the town\
it penetrated to the school and even reached the ears of the masters. But\
then Kolya\'92s mother hastened to entreat the masters on her boy\'92s behalf,\
and in the end Dardanelov, a respected and influential teacher, exerted\
himself in his favor, and the affair was ignored.\
\
Dardanelov was a middle\uc0\u8208 aged bachelor, who had been passionately in love\
with Madame Krassotkin for many years past, and had once already, about a\
year previously, ventured, trembling with fear and the delicacy of his\
sentiments, to offer her most respectfully his hand in marriage. But she\
refused him resolutely, feeling that to accept him would be an act of\
treachery to her son, though Dardanelov had, to judge from certain\
mysterious symptoms, reason for believing that he was not an object of\
aversion to the charming but too chaste and tender\uc0\u8208 hearted widow. Kolya\'92s\
mad prank seemed to have broken the ice, and Dardanelov was rewarded for\
his intercession by a suggestion of hope. The suggestion, it is true, was\
a faint one, but then Dardanelov was such a paragon of purity and delicacy\
that it was enough for the time being to make him perfectly happy. He was\
fond of the boy, though he would have felt it beneath him to try and win\
him over, and was severe and strict with him in class. Kolya, too, kept\
him at a respectful distance. He learned his lessons perfectly; he was\
second in his class, was reserved with Dardanelov, and the whole class\
firmly believed that Kolya was so good at universal history that he could\
\'93beat\'94 even Dardanelov. Kolya did indeed ask him the question, \'93Who\
founded Troy?\'94 to which Dardanelov had made a very vague reply, referring\
to the movements and migrations of races, to the remoteness of the period,\
to the mythical legends. But the question, \'93Who had founded Troy?\'94 that\
is, what individuals, he could not answer, and even for some reason\
regarded the question as idle and frivolous. But the boys remained\
convinced that Dardanelov did not know who founded Troy. Kolya had read of\
the founders of Troy in Smaragdov, whose history was among the books in\
his father\'92s bookcase. In the end all the boys became interested in the\
question, who it was that had founded Troy, but Krassotkin would not tell\
his secret, and his reputation for knowledge remained unshaken.\
\
After the incident on the railway a certain change came over Kolya\'92s\
attitude to his mother. When Anna Fyodorovna (Madame Krassotkin) heard of\
her son\'92s exploit, she almost went out of her mind with horror. She had\
such terrible attacks of hysterics, lasting with intervals for several\
days, that Kolya, seriously alarmed at last, promised on his honor that\
such pranks should never be repeated. He swore on his knees before the\
holy image, and swore by the memory of his father, at Madame Krassotkin\'92s\
instance, and the \'93manly\'94 Kolya burst into tears like a boy of six. And\
all that day the mother and son were constantly rushing into each other\'92s\
arms sobbing. Next day Kolya woke up as \'93unfeeling\'94 as before, but he had\
become more silent, more modest, sterner, and more thoughtful.\
\
Six weeks later, it is true, he got into another scrape, which even\
brought his name to the ears of our Justice of the Peace, but it was a\
scrape of quite another kind, amusing, foolish, and he did not, as it\
turned out, take the leading part in it, but was only implicated in it.\
But of this later. His mother still fretted and trembled, but the more\
uneasy she became, the greater were the hopes of Dardanelov. It must be\
noted that Kolya understood and divined what was in Dardanelov\'92s heart\
and, of course, despised him profoundly for his \'93feelings\'94; he had in the\
past been so tactless as to show this contempt before his mother, hinting\
vaguely that he knew what Dardanelov was after. But from the time of the\
railway incident his behavior in this respect also was changed; he did not\
allow himself the remotest allusion to the subject and began to speak more\
respectfully of Dardanelov before his mother, which the sensitive woman at\
once appreciated with boundless gratitude. But at the slightest mention of\
Dardanelov by a visitor in Kolya\'92s presence, she would flush as pink as a\
rose. At such moments Kolya would either stare out of the window scowling,\
or would investigate the state of his boots, or would shout angrily for\
\'93Perezvon,\'94 the big, shaggy, mangy dog, which he had picked up a month\
before, brought home, and kept for some reason secretly indoors, not\
showing him to any of his schoolfellows. He bullied him frightfully,\
teaching him all sorts of tricks, so that the poor dog howled for him\
whenever he was absent at school, and when he came in, whined with\
delight, rushed about as if he were crazy, begged, lay down on the ground\
pretending to be dead, and so on; in fact, showed all the tricks he had\
taught him, not at the word of command, but simply from the zeal of his\
excited and grateful heart.\
\
I have forgotten, by the way, to mention that Kolya Krassotkin was the boy\
stabbed with a penknife by the boy already known to the reader as the son\
of Captain Snegiryov. Ilusha had been defending his father when the\
schoolboys jeered at him, shouting the nickname \'93wisp of tow.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter II. Children\
\
\
And so on that frosty, snowy, and windy day in November, Kolya Krassotkin\
was sitting at home. It was Sunday and there was no school. It had just\
struck eleven, and he particularly wanted to go out \'93on very urgent\
business,\'94 but he was left alone in charge of the house, for it so\
happened that all its elder inmates were absent owing to a sudden and\
singular event. Madame Krassotkin had let two little rooms, separated from\
the rest of the house by a passage, to a doctor\'92s wife with her two small\
children. This lady was the same age as Anna Fyodorovna, and a great\
friend of hers. Her husband, the doctor, had taken his departure twelve\
months before, going first to Orenburg and then to Tashkend, and for the\
last six months she had not heard a word from him. Had it not been for her\
friendship with Madame Krassotkin, which was some consolation to the\
forsaken lady, she would certainly have completely dissolved away in\
tears. And now, to add to her misfortunes, Katerina, her only servant, was\
suddenly moved the evening before to announce, to her mistress\'92s\
amazement, that she proposed to bring a child into the world before\
morning. It seemed almost miraculous to every one that no one had noticed\
the probability of it before. The astounded doctor\'92s wife decided to move\
Katerina while there was still time to an establishment in the town kept\
by a midwife for such emergencies. As she set great store by her servant,\
she promptly carried out this plan and remained there looking after her.\
By the morning all Madame Krassotkin\'92s friendly sympathy and energy were\
called upon to render assistance and appeal to some one for help in the\
case.\
\
So both the ladies were absent from home, the Krassotkins\'92 servant,\
Agafya, had gone out to the market, and Kolya was thus left for a time to\
protect and look after \'93the kids,\'94 that is, the son and daughter of the\
doctor\'92s wife, who were left alone. Kolya was not afraid of taking care of\
the house, besides he had Perezvon, who had been told to lie flat, without\
moving, under the bench in the hall. Every time Kolya, walking to and fro\
through the rooms, came into the hall, the dog shook his head and gave two\
loud and insinuating taps on the floor with his tail, but alas! the\
whistle did not sound to release him. Kolya looked sternly at the luckless\
dog, who relapsed again into obedient rigidity. The one thing that\
troubled Kolya was \'93the kids.\'94 He looked, of course, with the utmost scorn\
on Katerina\'92s unexpected adventure, but he was very fond of the bereaved\
\'93kiddies,\'94 and had already taken them a picture\uc0\u8208 book. Nastya, the elder, a\
girl of eight, could read, and Kostya, the boy, aged seven, was very fond\
of being read to by her. Krassotkin could, of course, have provided more\
diverting entertainment for them. He could have made them stand side by\
side and played soldiers with them, or sent them hiding all over the\
house. He had done so more than once before and was not above doing it, so\
much so that a report once spread at school that Krassotkin played horses\
with the little lodgers at home, prancing with his head on one side like a\
trace\uc0\u8208 horse. But Krassotkin haughtily parried this thrust, pointing out\
that to play horses with boys of one\'92s own age, boys of thirteen, would\
certainly be disgraceful \'93at this date,\'94 but that he did it for the sake\
of \'93the kids\'94 because he liked them, and no one had a right to call him to\
account for his feelings. The two \'93kids\'94 adored him.\
\
But on this occasion he was in no mood for games. He had very important\
business of his own before him, something almost mysterious. Meanwhile\
time was passing and Agafya, with whom he could have left the children,\
would not come back from market. He had several times already crossed the\
passage, opened the door of the lodgers\'92 room and looked anxiously at \'93the\
kids\'94 who were sitting over the book, as he had bidden them. Every time he\
opened the door they grinned at him, hoping he would come in and would do\
something delightful and amusing. But Kolya was bothered and did not go\
in.\
\
At last it struck eleven and he made up his mind, once for all, that if\
that \'93damned\'94 Agafya did not come back within ten minutes he should go out\
without waiting for her, making \'93the kids\'94 promise, of course, to be brave\
when he was away, not to be naughty, not to cry from fright. With this\
idea he put on his wadded winter overcoat with its catskin fur collar,\
slung his satchel round his shoulder, and, regardless of his mother\'92s\
constantly reiterated entreaties that he would always put on goloshes in\
such cold weather, he looked at them contemptuously as he crossed the hall\
and went out with only his boots on. Perezvon, seeing him in his outdoor\
clothes, began tapping nervously, yet vigorously, on the floor with his\
tail. Twitching all over, he even uttered a plaintive whine. But Kolya,\
seeing his dog\'92s passionate excitement, decided that it was a breach of\
discipline, kept him for another minute under the bench, and only when he\
had opened the door into the passage, whistled for him. The dog leapt up\
like a mad creature and rushed bounding before him rapturously.\
\
Kolya opened the door to peep at \'93the kids.\'94 They were both sitting as\
before at the table, not reading but warmly disputing about something. The\
children often argued together about various exciting problems of life,\
and Nastya, being the elder, always got the best of it. If Kostya did not\
agree with her, he almost always appealed to Kolya Krassotkin, and his\
verdict was regarded as infallible by both of them. This time the \'93kids\'92\'94\
discussion rather interested Krassotkin, and he stood still in the passage\
to listen. The children saw he was listening and that made them dispute\
with even greater energy.\
\
\'93I shall never, never believe,\'94 Nastya prattled, \'93that the old women find\
babies among the cabbages in the kitchen\uc0\u8208 garden. It\'92s winter now and there\
are no cabbages, and so the old woman couldn\'92t have taken Katerina a\
daughter.\'94\
\
Kolya whistled to himself.\
\
\'93Or perhaps they do bring babies from somewhere, but only to those who are\
married.\'94\
\
Kostya stared at Nastya and listened, pondering profoundly.\
\
\'93Nastya, how silly you are!\'94 he said at last, firmly and calmly. \'93How can\
Katerina have a baby when she isn\'92t married?\'94\
\
Nastya was exasperated.\
\
\'93You know nothing about it,\'94 she snapped irritably. \'93Perhaps she has a\
husband, only he is in prison, so now she\'92s got a baby.\'94\
\
\'93But is her husband in prison?\'94 the matter\uc0\u8208 of\u8208 fact Kostya inquired\
gravely.\
\
\'93Or, I tell you what,\'94 Nastya interrupted impulsively, completely\
rejecting and forgetting her first hypothesis. \'93She hasn\'92t a husband, you\
are right there, but she wants to be married, and so she\'92s been thinking\
of getting married, and thinking and thinking of it till now she\'92s got it,\
that is, not a husband but a baby.\'94\
\
\'93Well, perhaps so,\'94 Kostya agreed, entirely vanquished. \'93But you didn\'92t\
say so before. So how could I tell?\'94\
\
\'93Come, kiddies,\'94 said Kolya, stepping into the room. \'93You\'92re terrible\
people, I see.\'94\
\
\'93And Perezvon with you!\'94 grinned Kostya, and began snapping his fingers\
and calling Perezvon.\
\
\'93I am in a difficulty, kids,\'94 Krassotkin began solemnly, \'93and you must\
help me. Agafya must have broken her leg, since she has not turned up till\
now, that\'92s certain. I must go out. Will you let me go?\'94\
\
The children looked anxiously at one another. Their smiling faces showed\
signs of uneasiness, but they did not yet fully grasp what was expected of\
them.\
\
\'93You won\'92t be naughty while I am gone? You won\'92t climb on the cupboard and\
break your legs? You won\'92t be frightened alone and cry?\'94\
\
A look of profound despondency came into the children\'92s faces.\
\
\'93And I could show you something as a reward, a little copper cannon which\
can be fired with real gunpowder.\'94\
\
The children\'92s faces instantly brightened. \'93Show us the cannon,\'94 said\
Kostya, beaming all over.\
\
Krassotkin put his hand in his satchel, and pulling out a little bronze\
cannon stood it on the table.\
\
\'93Ah, you are bound to ask that! Look, it\'92s on wheels.\'94 He rolled the toy\
on along the table. \'93And it can be fired off, too. It can be loaded with\
shot and fired off.\'94\
\
\'93And it could kill any one?\'94\
\
\'93It can kill any one; you\'92ve only got to aim at anybody,\'94 and Krassotkin\
explained where the powder had to be put, where the shot should be rolled\
in, showing a tiny hole like a touch\uc0\u8208 hole, and told them that it kicked\
when it was fired.\
\
The children listened with intense interest. What particularly struck\
their imagination was that the cannon kicked.\
\
\'93And have you got any powder?\'94 Nastya inquired.\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93Show us the powder, too,\'94 she drawled with a smile of entreaty.\
\
Krassotkin dived again into his satchel and pulled out a small flask\
containing a little real gunpowder. He had some shot, too, in a screw of\
paper. He even uncorked the flask and shook a little powder into the palm\
of his hand.\
\
\'93One has to be careful there\'92s no fire about, or it would blow up and kill\
us all,\'94 Krassotkin warned them sensationally.\
\
The children gazed at the powder with an awe\uc0\u8208 stricken alarm that only\
intensified their enjoyment. But Kostya liked the shot better.\
\
\'93And does the shot burn?\'94 he inquired.\
\
\'93No, it doesn\'92t.\'94\
\
\'93Give me a little shot,\'94 he asked in an imploring voice.\
\
\'93I\'92ll give you a little shot; here, take it, but don\'92t show it to your\
mother till I come back, or she\'92ll be sure to think it\'92s gunpowder, and\
will die of fright and give you a thrashing.\'94\
\
\'93Mother never does whip us,\'94 Nastya observed at once.\
\
\'93I know, I only said it to finish the sentence. And don\'92t you ever deceive\
your mother except just this once, until I come back. And so, kiddies, can\
I go out? You won\'92t be frightened and cry when I\'92m gone?\'94\
\
\'93We sha\'97all cry,\'94 drawled Kostya, on the verge of tears already.\
\
\'93We shall cry, we shall be sure to cry,\'94 Nastya chimed in with timid\
haste.\
\
\'93Oh, children, children, how fraught with peril are your years! There\'92s no\
help for it, chickens, I shall have to stay with you I don\'92t know how\
long. And time is passing, time is passing, oogh!\'94\
\
\'93Tell Perezvon to pretend to be dead!\'94 Kostya begged.\
\
\'93There\'92s no help for it, we must have recourse to Perezvon. _Ici_,\
Perezvon.\'94 And Kolya began giving orders to the dog, who performed all his\
tricks.\
\
He was a rough\uc0\u8208 haired dog, of medium size, with a coat of a sort of lilac\u8208 \
gray color. He was blind in his right eye, and his left ear was torn. He\
whined and jumped, stood and walked on his hind legs, lay on his back with\
his paws in the air, rigid as though he were dead. While this last\
performance was going on, the door opened and Agafya, Madame Krassotkin\'92s\
servant, a stout woman of forty, marked with small\uc0\u8208 pox, appeared in the\
doorway. She had come back from market and had a bag full of provisions in\
her hand. Holding up the bag of provisions in her left hand she stood\
still to watch the dog. Though Kolya had been so anxious for her return,\
he did not cut short the performance, and after keeping Perezvon dead for\
the usual time, at last he whistled to him. The dog jumped up and began\
bounding about in his joy at having done his duty.\
\
\'93Only think, a dog!\'94 Agafya observed sententiously.\
\
\'93Why are you late, female?\'94 asked Krassotkin sternly.\
\
\'93Female, indeed! Go on with you, you brat.\'94\
\
\'93Brat?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, a brat. What is it to you if I\'92m late; if I\'92m late, you may be sure\
I have good reason,\'94 muttered Agafya, busying herself about the stove,\
without a trace of anger or displeasure in her voice. She seemed quite\
pleased, in fact, to enjoy a skirmish with her merry young master.\
\
\'93Listen, you frivolous young woman,\'94 Krassotkin began, getting up from the\
sofa, \'93can you swear by all you hold sacred in the world and something\
else besides, that you will watch vigilantly over the kids in my absence?\
I am going out.\'94\
\
\'93And what am I going to swear for?\'94 laughed Agafya. \'93I shall look after\
them without that.\'94\
\
\'93No, you must swear on your eternal salvation. Else I shan\'92t go.\'94\
\
\'93Well, don\'92t then. What does it matter to me? It\'92s cold out; stay at\
home.\'94\
\
\'93Kids,\'94 Kolya turned to the children, \'93this woman will stay with you till\
I come back or till your mother comes, for she ought to have been back\
long ago. She will give you some lunch, too. You\'92ll give them something,\
Agafya, won\'92t you?\'94\
\
\'93That I can do.\'94\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by, chickens, I go with my heart at rest. And you, granny,\'94 he added\
gravely, in an undertone, as he passed Agafya, \'93I hope you\'92ll spare their\
tender years and not tell them any of your old woman\'92s nonsense about\
Katerina. _Ici_, Perezvon!\'94\
\
\'93Get along with you!\'94 retorted Agafya, really angry this time. \'93Ridiculous\
boy! You want a whipping for saying such things, that\'92s what you want!\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter III. The Schoolboy\
\
\
But Kolya did not hear her. At last he could go out. As he went out at the\
gate he looked round him, shrugged up his shoulders, and saying \'93It is\
freezing,\'94 went straight along the street and turned off to the right\
towards the market\uc0\u8208 place. When he reached the last house but one before\
the market\uc0\u8208 place he stopped at the gate, pulled a whistle out of his\
pocket, and whistled with all his might as though giving a signal. He had\
not to wait more than a minute before a rosy\uc0\u8208 cheeked boy of about eleven,\
wearing a warm, neat and even stylish coat, darted out to meet him. This\
was Smurov, a boy in the preparatory class (two classes below Kolya\
Krassotkin), son of a well\uc0\u8208 to\u8208 do official. Apparently he was forbidden by\
his parents to associate with Krassotkin, who was well known to be a\
desperately naughty boy, so Smurov was obviously slipping out on the sly.\
He was\'97if the reader has not forgotten\'97one of the group of boys who two\
months before had thrown stones at Ilusha. He was the one who told Alyosha\
Karamazov about Ilusha.\
\
\'93I\'92ve been waiting for you for the last hour, Krassotkin,\'94 said Smurov\
stolidly, and the boys strode towards the market\uc0\u8208 place.\
\
\'93I am late,\'94 answered Krassotkin. \'93I was detained by circumstances. You\
won\'92t be thrashed for coming with me?\'94\
\
\'93Come, I say, I\'92m never thrashed! And you\'92ve got Perezvon with you?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92re taking him, too?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93Ah! if it were only Zhutchka!\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s impossible. Zhutchka\'92s non\uc0\u8208 existent. Zhutchka is lost in the mists\
of obscurity.\'94\
\
\'93Ah! couldn\'92t we do this?\'94 Smurov suddenly stood still. \'93You see Ilusha\
says that Zhutchka was a shaggy, grayish, smoky\uc0\u8208 looking dog like Perezvon.\
Couldn\'92t you tell him this is Zhutchka, and he might believe you?\'94\
\
\'93Boy, shun a lie, that\'92s one thing; even with a good object\'97that\'92s\
another. Above all, I hope you\'92ve not told them anything about my coming.\'94\
\
\'93Heaven forbid! I know what I am about. But you won\'92t comfort him with\
Perezvon,\'94 said Smurov, with a sigh. \'93You know his father, the captain,\
\'91the wisp of tow,\'92 told us that he was going to bring him a real mastiff\
pup, with a black nose, to\uc0\u8208 day. He thinks that would comfort Ilusha; but I\
doubt it.\'94\
\
\'93And how is Ilusha?\'94\
\
\'93Ah, he is bad, very bad! I believe he\'92s in consumption: he is quite\
conscious, but his breathing! His breathing\'92s gone wrong. The other day he\
asked to have his boots on to be led round the room. He tried to walk, but\
he couldn\'92t stand. \'91Ah, I told you before, father,\'92 he said, \'91that those\
boots were no good. I could never walk properly in them.\'92 He fancied it\
was his boots that made him stagger, but it was simply weakness, really.\
He won\'92t live another week. Herzenstube is looking after him. Now they are\
rich again\'97they\'92ve got heaps of money.\'94\
\
\'93They are rogues.\'94\
\
\'93Who are rogues?\'94\
\
\'93Doctors and the whole crew of quacks collectively, and also, of course,\
individually. I don\'92t believe in medicine. It\'92s a useless institution. I\
mean to go into all that. But what\'92s that sentimentality you\'92ve got up\
there? The whole class seems to be there every day.\'94\
\
\'93Not the whole class: it\'92s only ten of our fellows who go to see him every\
day. There\'92s nothing in that.\'94\
\
\'93What I don\'92t understand in all this is the part that Alexey Karamazov is\
taking in it. His brother\'92s going to be tried to\uc0\u8208 morrow or next day for\
such a crime, and yet he has so much time to spend on sentimentality with\
boys.\'94\
\
\'93There\'92s no sentimentality about it. You are going yourself now to make it\
up with Ilusha.\'94\
\
\'93Make it up with him? What an absurd expression! But I allow no one to\
analyze my actions.\'94\
\
\'93And how pleased Ilusha will be to see you! He has no idea that you are\
coming. Why was it, why was it you wouldn\'92t come all this time?\'94 Smurov\
cried with sudden warmth.\
\
\'93My dear boy, that\'92s my business, not yours. I am going of myself because\
I choose to, but you\'92ve all been hauled there by Alexey Karamazov\'97there\'92s\
a difference, you know. And how do you know? I may not be going to make it\
up at all. It\'92s a stupid expression.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s not Karamazov at all; it\'92s not his doing. Our fellows began going\
there of themselves. Of course, they went with Karamazov at first. And\
there\'92s been nothing of that sort\'97no silliness. First one went, and then\
another. His father was awfully pleased to see us. You know he will simply\
go out of his mind if Ilusha dies. He sees that Ilusha\'92s dying. And he\
seems so glad we\'92ve made it up with Ilusha. Ilusha asked after you, that\
was all. He just asks and says no more. His father will go out of his mind\
or hang himself. He behaved like a madman before. You know he is a very\
decent man. We made a mistake then. It\'92s all the fault of that murderer\
who beat him then.\'94\
\
\'93Karamazov\'92s a riddle to me all the same. I might have made his\
acquaintance long ago, but I like to have a proper pride in some cases.\
Besides, I have a theory about him which I must work out and verify.\'94\
\
Kolya subsided into dignified silence. Smurov, too, was silent. Smurov, of\
course, worshiped Krassotkin and never dreamed of putting himself on a\
level with him. Now he was tremendously interested at Kolya\'92s saying that\
he was \'93going of himself\'94 to see Ilusha. He felt that there must be some\
mystery in Kolya\'92s suddenly taking it into his head to go to him that day.\
They crossed the market\uc0\u8208 place, in which at that hour were many loaded\
wagons from the country and a great number of live fowls. The market women\
were selling rolls, cottons and threads, etc., in their booths. These\
Sunday markets were na\'efvely called \'93fairs\'94 in the town, and there were\
many such fairs in the year.\
\
Perezvon ran about in the wildest spirits, sniffing about first one side,\
then the other. When he met other dogs they zealously smelt each other\
over according to the rules of canine etiquette.\
\
\'93I like to watch such realistic scenes, Smurov,\'94 said Kolya suddenly.\
\'93Have you noticed how dogs sniff at one another when they meet? It seems\
to be a law of their nature.\'94\
\
\'93Yes; it\'92s a funny habit.\'94\
\
\'93No, it\'92s not funny; you are wrong there. There\'92s nothing funny in nature,\
however funny it may seem to man with his prejudices. If dogs could reason\
and criticize us they\'92d be sure to find just as much that would be funny\
to them, if not far more, in the social relations of men, their\
masters\'97far more, indeed. I repeat that, because I am convinced that there\
is far more foolishness among us. That\'92s Rakitin\'92s idea\'97a remarkable idea.\
I am a Socialist, Smurov.\'94\
\
\'93And what is a Socialist?\'94 asked Smurov.\
\
\'93That\'92s when all are equal and all have property in common, there are no\
marriages, and every one has any religion and laws he likes best, and all\
the rest of it. You are not old enough to understand that yet. It\'92s cold,\
though.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, twelve degrees of frost. Father looked at the thermometer just now.\'94\
\
\'93Have you noticed, Smurov, that in the middle of winter we don\'92t feel so\
cold even when there are fifteen or eighteen degrees of frost as we do\
now, in the beginning of winter, when there is a sudden frost of twelve\
degrees, especially when there is not much snow. It\'92s because people are\
not used to it. Everything is habit with men, everything even in their\
social and political relations. Habit is the great motive\uc0\u8208 power. What a\
funny\uc0\u8208 looking peasant!\'94\
\
Kolya pointed to a tall peasant, with a good\uc0\u8208 natured countenance in a long\
sheepskin coat, who was standing by his wagon, clapping together his\
hands, in their shapeless leather gloves, to warm them. His long fair\
beard was all white with frost.\
\
\'93That peasant\'92s beard\'92s frozen,\'94 Kolya cried in a loud provocative voice\
as he passed him.\
\
\'93Lots of people\'92s beards are frozen,\'94 the peasant replied, calmly and\
sententiously.\
\
\'93Don\'92t provoke him,\'94 observed Smurov.\
\
\'93It\'92s all right; he won\'92t be cross; he\'92s a nice fellow. Good\uc0\u8208 by, Matvey.\'94\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by.\'94\
\
\'93Is your name Matvey?\'94\
\
\'93Yes. Didn\'92t you know?\'94\
\
\'93No, I didn\'92t. It was a guess.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t say so! You are a schoolboy, I suppose?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93You get whipped, I expect?\'94\
\
\'93Nothing to speak of\'97sometimes.\'94\
\
\'93Does it hurt?\'94\
\
\'93Well, yes, it does.\'94\
\
\'93Ech, what a life!\'94 The peasant heaved a sigh from the bottom of his\
heart.\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by, Matvey.\'94\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by. You are a nice chap, that you are.\'94\
\
The boys went on.\
\
\'93That was a nice peasant,\'94 Kolya observed to Smurov. \'93I like talking to\
the peasants, and am always glad to do them justice.\'94\
\
\'93Why did you tell a lie, pretending we are thrashed?\'94 asked Smurov.\
\
\'93I had to say that to please him.\'94\
\
\'93How do you mean?\'94\
\
\'93You know, Smurov, I don\'92t like being asked the same thing twice. I like\
people to understand at the first word. Some things can\'92t be explained.\
According to a peasant\'92s notions, schoolboys are whipped, and must be\
whipped. What would a schoolboy be if he were not whipped? And if I were\
to tell him we are not, he\'92d be disappointed. But you don\'92t understand\
that. One has to know how to talk to the peasants.\'94\
\
\'93Only don\'92t tease them, please, or you\'92ll get into another scrape as you\
did about that goose.\'94\
\
\'93So you\'92re afraid?\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t laugh, Kolya. Of course I\'92m afraid. My father would be awfully\
cross. I am strictly forbidden to go out with you.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t be uneasy, nothing will happen this time. Hallo, Natasha!\'94 he\
shouted to a market woman in one of the booths.\
\
\'93Call me Natasha! What next! My name is Marya,\'94 the middle\uc0\u8208 aged market\
woman shouted at him.\
\
\'93I am so glad it\'92s Marya. Good\uc0\u8208 by!\'94\
\
\'93Ah, you young rascal! A brat like you to carry on so!\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m in a hurry. I can\'92t stay now. You shall tell me next Sunday.\'94 Kolya\
waved his hand at her, as though she had attacked him and not he her.\
\
\'93I\'92ve nothing to tell you next Sunday. You set upon me, you impudent young\
monkey. I didn\'92t say anything,\'94 bawled Marya. \'93You want a whipping, that\'92s\
what you want, you saucy jackanapes!\'94\
\
There was a roar of laughter among the other market women round her.\
Suddenly a man in a violent rage darted out from the arcade of shops close\
by. He was a young man, not a native of the town, with dark, curly hair\
and a long, pale face, marked with smallpox. He wore a long blue coat and\
a peaked cap, and looked like a merchant\'92s clerk. He was in a state of\
stupid excitement and brandished his fist at Kolya.\
\
\'93I know you!\'94 he cried angrily, \'93I know you!\'94\
\
Kolya stared at him. He could not recall when he could have had a row with\
the man. But he had been in so many rows in the street that he could\
hardly remember them all.\
\
\'93Do you?\'94 he asked sarcastically.\
\
\'93I know you! I know you!\'94 the man repeated idiotically.\
\
\'93So much the better for you. Well, it\'92s time I was going. Good\uc0\u8208 by!\'94\
\
\'93You are at your saucy pranks again?\'94 cried the man. \'93You are at your\
saucy pranks again? I know, you are at it again!\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s not your business, brother, if I am at my saucy pranks again,\'94 said\
Kolya, standing still and scanning him.\
\
\'93Not my business?\'94\
\
\'93No; it\'92s not your business.\'94\
\
\'93Whose then? Whose then? Whose then?\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s Trifon Nikititch\'92s business, not yours.\'94\
\
\'93What Trifon Nikititch?\'94 asked the youth, staring with loutish amazement\
at Kolya, but still as angry as ever.\
\
Kolya scanned him gravely.\
\
\'93Have you been to the Church of the Ascension?\'94 he suddenly asked him,\
with stern emphasis.\
\
\'93What Church of Ascension? What for? No, I haven\'92t,\'94 said the young man,\
somewhat taken aback.\
\
\'93Do you know Sabaneyev?\'94 Kolya went on even more emphatically and even\
more severely.\
\
\'93What Sabaneyev? No, I don\'92t know him.\'94\
\
\'93Well then you can go to the devil,\'94 said Kolya, cutting short the\
conversation; and turning sharply to the right he strode quickly on his\
way as though he disdained further conversation with a dolt who did not\
even know Sabaneyev.\
\
\'93Stop, heigh! What Sabaneyev?\'94 the young man recovered from his momentary\
stupefaction and was as excited as before. \'93What did he say?\'94 He turned to\
the market women with a silly stare.\
\
The women laughed.\
\
\'93You can never tell what he\'92s after,\'94 said one of them.\
\
\'93What Sabaneyev is it he\'92s talking about?\'94 the young man repeated, still\
furious and brandishing his right arm.\
\
\'93It must be a Sabaneyev who worked for the Kuzmitchovs, that\'92s who it must\
be,\'94 one of the women suggested.\
\
The young man stared at her wildly.\
\
\'93For the Kuzmitchovs?\'94 repeated another woman. \'93But his name wasn\'92t\
Trifon. His name\'92s Kuzma, not Trifon; but the boy said Trifon Nikititch,\
so it can\'92t be the same.\'94\
\
\'93His name is not Trifon and not Sabaneyev, it\'92s Tchizhov,\'94 put in suddenly\
a third woman, who had hitherto been silent, listening gravely. \'93Alexey\
Ivanitch is his name. Tchizhov, Alexey Ivanitch.\'94\
\
\'93Not a doubt about it, it\'92s Tchizhov,\'94 a fourth woman emphatically\
confirmed the statement.\
\
The bewildered youth gazed from one to another.\
\
\'93But what did he ask for, what did he ask for, good people?\'94 he cried\
almost in desperation. \'93 \'91Do you know Sabaneyev?\'92 says he. And who the\
devil\'92s to know who is Sabaneyev?\'94\
\
\'93You\'92re a senseless fellow. I tell you it\'92s not Sabaneyev, but Tchizhov,\
Alexey Ivanitch Tchizhov, that\'92s who it is!\'94 one of the women shouted at\
him impressively.\
\
\'93What Tchizhov? Who is he? Tell me, if you know.\'94\
\
\'93That tall, sniveling fellow who used to sit in the market in the summer.\'94\
\
\'93And what\'92s your Tchizhov to do with me, good people, eh?\'94\
\
\'93How can I tell what he\'92s to do with you?\'94 put in another. \'93You ought to\
know yourself what you want with him, if you make such a clamor about him.\
He spoke to you, he did not speak to us, you stupid. Don\'92t you really know\
him?\'94\
\
\'93Know whom?\'94\
\
\'93Tchizhov.\'94\
\
\'93The devil take Tchizhov and you with him. I\'92ll give him a hiding, that I\
will. He was laughing at me!\'94\
\
\'93Will give Tchizhov a hiding! More likely he will give you one. You are a\
fool, that\'92s what you are!\'94\
\
\'93Not Tchizhov, not Tchizhov, you spiteful, mischievous woman. I\'92ll give\
the boy a hiding. Catch him, catch him, he was laughing at me!\'94\
\
The woman guffawed. But Kolya was by now a long way off, marching along\
with a triumphant air. Smurov walked beside him, looking round at the\
shouting group far behind. He too was in high spirits, though he was still\
afraid of getting into some scrape in Kolya\'92s company.\
\
\'93What Sabaneyev did you mean?\'94 he asked Kolya, foreseeing what his answer\
would be.\
\
\'93How do I know? Now there\'92ll be a hubbub among them all day. I like to\
stir up fools in every class of society. There\'92s another blockhead, that\
peasant there. You know, they say \'91there\'92s no one stupider than a stupid\
Frenchman,\'92 but a stupid Russian shows it in his face just as much. Can\'92t\
you see it all over his face that he is a fool, that peasant, eh?\'94\
\
\'93Let him alone, Kolya. Let\'92s go on.\'94\
\
\'93Nothing could stop me, now I am once off. Hey, good morning, peasant!\'94\
\
A sturdy\uc0\u8208 looking peasant, with a round, simple face and grizzled beard,\
who was walking by, raised his head and looked at the boy. He seemed not\
quite sober.\
\
\'93Good morning, if you are not laughing at me,\'94 he said deliberately in\
reply.\
\
\'93And if I am?\'94 laughed Kolya.\
\
\'93Well, a joke\'92s a joke. Laugh away. I don\'92t mind. There\'92s no harm in a\
joke.\'94\
\
\'93I beg your pardon, brother, it was a joke.\'94\
\
\'93Well, God forgive you!\'94\
\
\'93Do you forgive me, too?\'94\
\
\'93I quite forgive you. Go along.\'94\
\
\'93I say, you seem a clever peasant.\'94\
\
\'93Cleverer than you,\'94 the peasant answered unexpectedly, with the same\
gravity.\
\
\'93I doubt it,\'94 said Kolya, somewhat taken aback.\
\
\'93It\'92s true, though.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps it is.\'94\
\
\'93It is, brother.\'94\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by, peasant!\'94\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by!\'94\
\
\'93There are all sorts of peasants,\'94 Kolya observed to Smurov after a brief\
silence. \'93How could I tell I had hit on a clever one? I am always ready to\
recognize intelligence in the peasantry.\'94\
\
In the distance the cathedral clock struck half\uc0\u8208 past eleven. The boys made\
haste and they walked as far as Captain Snegiryov\'92s lodging, a\
considerable distance, quickly and almost in silence. Twenty paces from\
the house Kolya stopped and told Smurov to go on ahead and ask Karamazov\
to come out to him.\
\
\'93One must sniff round a bit first,\'94 he observed to Smurov.\
\
\'93Why ask him to come out?\'94 Smurov protested. \'93You go in; they will be\
awfully glad to see you. What\'92s the sense of making friends in the frost\
out here?\'94\
\
\'93I know why I want to see him out here in the frost,\'94 Kolya cut him short\
in the despotic tone he was fond of adopting with \'93small boys,\'94 and Smurov\
ran to do his bidding.\
\
\
\
Chapter IV. The Lost Dog\
\
\
Kolya leaned against the fence with an air of dignity, waiting for Alyosha\
to appear. Yes, he had long wanted to meet him. He had heard a great deal\
about him from the boys, but hitherto he had always maintained an\
appearance of disdainful indifference when he was mentioned, and he had\
even \'93criticized\'94 what he heard about Alyosha. But secretly he had a great\
longing to make his acquaintance; there was something sympathetic and\
attractive in all he was told about Alyosha. So the present moment was\
important: to begin with, he had to show himself at his best, to show his\
independence, \'93Or he\'92ll think of me as thirteen and take me for a boy,\
like the rest of them. And what are these boys to him? I shall ask him\
when I get to know him. It\'92s a pity I am so short, though. Tuzikov is\
younger than I am, yet he is half a head taller. But I have a clever face.\
I am not good\uc0\u8208 looking. I know I\'92m hideous, but I\'92ve a clever face. I\
mustn\'92t talk too freely; if I fall into his arms all at once, he may\
think\'97Tfoo! how horrible if he should think\'97!\'94\
\
Such were the thoughts that excited Kolya while he was doing his utmost to\
assume the most independent air. What distressed him most was his being so\
short; he did not mind so much his \'93hideous\'94 face, as being so short. On\
the wall in a corner at home he had the year before made a pencil\uc0\u8208 mark to\
show his height, and every two months since he anxiously measured himself\
against it to see how much he had gained. But alas! he grew very slowly,\
and this sometimes reduced him almost to despair. His face was in reality\
by no means \'93hideous\'94; on the contrary, it was rather attractive, with a\
fair, pale skin, freckled. His small, lively gray eyes had a fearless\
look, and often glowed with feeling. He had rather high cheekbones; small,\
very red, but not very thick, lips; his nose was small and unmistakably\
turned up. \'93I\'92ve a regular pug nose, a regular pug nose,\'94 Kolya used to\
mutter to himself when he looked in the looking\uc0\u8208 glass, and he always left\
it with indignation. \'93But perhaps I haven\'92t got a clever face?\'94 he\
sometimes thought, doubtful even of that. But it must not be supposed that\
his mind was preoccupied with his face and his height. On the contrary,\
however bitter the moments before the looking\uc0\u8208 glass were to him, he\
quickly forgot them, and forgot them for a long time, \'93abandoning himself\
entirely to ideas and to real life,\'94 as he formulated it to himself.\
\
Alyosha came out quickly and hastened up to Kolya. Before he reached him,\
Kolya could see that he looked delighted. \'93Can he be so glad to see me?\'94\
Kolya wondered, feeling pleased. We may note here, in passing, that\
Alyosha\'92s appearance had undergone a complete change since we saw him\
last. He had abandoned his cassock and was wearing now a well\uc0\u8208 cut coat, a\
soft, round hat, and his hair had been cropped short. All this was very\
becoming to him, and he looked quite handsome. His charming face always\
had a good\uc0\u8208 humored expression; but there was a gentleness and serenity in\
his good\uc0\u8208 humor. To Kolya\'92s surprise, Alyosha came out to him just as he\
was, without an overcoat. He had evidently come in haste. He held out his\
hand to Kolya at once.\
\
\'93Here you are at last! How anxious we\'92ve been to see you!\'94\
\
\'93There were reasons which you shall know directly. Anyway, I am glad to\
make your acquaintance. I\'92ve long been hoping for an opportunity, and have\
heard a great deal about you,\'94 Kolya muttered, a little breathless.\
\
\'93We should have met anyway. I\'92ve heard a great deal about you, too; but\
you\'92ve been a long time coming here.\'94\
\
\'93Tell me, how are things going?\'94\
\
\'93Ilusha is very ill. He is certainly dying.\'94\
\
\'93How awful! You must admit that medicine is a fraud, Karamazov,\'94 cried\
Kolya warmly.\
\
\'93Ilusha has mentioned you often, very often, even in his sleep, in\
delirium, you know. One can see that you used to be very, very dear to him\
... before the incident ... with the knife.... Then there\'92s another\
reason.... Tell me, is that your dog?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, Perezvon.\'94\
\
\'93Not Zhutchka?\'94 Alyosha looked at Kolya with eyes full of pity. \'93Is she\
lost for ever?\'94\
\
\'93I know you would all like it to be Zhutchka. I\'92ve heard all about it.\'94\
Kolya smiled mysteriously. \'93Listen, Karamazov, I\'92ll tell you all about it.\
That\'92s what I came for; that\'92s what I asked you to come out here for, to\
explain the whole episode to you before we go in,\'94 he began with\
animation. \'93You see, Karamazov, Ilusha came into the preparatory class\
last spring. Well, you know what our preparatory class is\'97a lot of small\
boys. They began teasing Ilusha at once. I am two classes higher up, and,\
of course, I only look on at them from a distance. I saw the boy was weak\
and small, but he wouldn\'92t give in to them; he fought with them. I saw he\
was proud, and his eyes were full of fire. I like children like that. And\
they teased him all the more. The worst of it was he was horribly dressed\
at the time, his breeches were too small for him, and there were holes in\
his boots. They worried him about it; they jeered at him. That I can\'92t\
stand. I stood up for him at once, and gave it to them hot. I beat them,\
but they adore me, do you know, Karamazov?\'94 Kolya boasted impulsively;\
\'93but I am always fond of children. I\'92ve two chickens in my hands at home\
now\'97that\'92s what detained me to\uc0\u8208 day. So they left off beating Ilusha and I\
took him under my protection. I saw the boy was proud. I tell you that,\
the boy was proud; but in the end he became slavishly devoted to me: he\
did my slightest bidding, obeyed me as though I were God, tried to copy\
me. In the intervals between the classes he used to run to me at once, and\
I\'92d go about with him. On Sundays, too. They always laugh when an older\
boy makes friends with a younger one like that; but that\'92s a prejudice. If\
it\'92s my fancy, that\'92s enough. I am teaching him, developing him. Why\
shouldn\'92t I develop him if I like him? Here you, Karamazov, have taken up\
with all these nestlings. I see you want to influence the younger\
generation\'97to develop them, to be of use to them, and I assure you this\
trait in your character, which I knew by hearsay, attracted me more than\
anything. Let us get to the point, though. I noticed that there was a sort\
of softness and sentimentality coming over the boy, and you know I have a\
positive hatred of this sheepish sentimentality, and I have had it from a\
baby. There were contradictions in him, too: he was proud, but he was\
slavishly devoted to me, and yet all at once his eyes would flash and he\'92d\
refuse to agree with me; he\'92d argue, fly into a rage. I used sometimes to\
propound certain ideas; I could see that it was not so much that he\
disagreed with the ideas, but that he was simply rebelling against me,\
because I was cool in responding to his endearments. And so, in order to\
train him properly, the tenderer he was, the colder I became. I did it on\
purpose: that was my idea. My object was to form his character, to lick\
him into shape, to make a man of him ... and besides ... no doubt, you\
understand me at a word. Suddenly I noticed for three days in succession\
he was downcast and dejected, not because of my coldness, but for\
something else, something more important. I wondered what the tragedy was.\
I have pumped him and found out that he had somehow got to know\
Smerdyakov, who was footman to your late father\'97it was before his death,\
of course\'97and he taught the little fool a silly trick\'97that is, a brutal,\
nasty trick. He told him to take a piece of bread, to stick a pin in it,\
and throw it to one of those hungry dogs who snap up anything without\
biting it, and then to watch and see what would happen. So they prepared a\
piece of bread like that and threw it to Zhutchka, that shaggy dog there\'92s\
been such a fuss about. The people of the house it belonged to never fed\
it at all, though it barked all day. (Do you like that stupid barking,\
Karamazov? I can\'92t stand it.) So it rushed at the bread, swallowed it, and\
began to squeal; it turned round and round and ran away, squealing as it\
ran out of sight. That was Ilusha\'92s own account of it. He confessed it to\
me, and cried bitterly. He hugged me, shaking all over. He kept on\
repeating \'91He ran away squealing\'92: the sight of that haunted him. He was\
tormented by remorse, I could see that. I took it seriously. I determined\
to give him a lesson for other things as well. So I must confess I wasn\'92t\
quite straightforward, and pretended to be more indignant perhaps than I\
was. \'91You\'92ve done a nasty thing,\'92 I said, \'91you are a scoundrel. I won\'92t\
tell of it, of course, but I shall have nothing more to do with you for a\
time. I\'92ll think it over and let you know through Smurov\'92\'97that\'92s the boy\
who\'92s just come with me; he\'92s always ready to do anything for me\'97\'91whether\
I will have anything to do with you in the future or whether I give you up\
for good as a scoundrel.\'92 He was tremendously upset. I must own I felt I\'92d\
gone too far as I spoke, but there was no help for it. I did what I\
thought best at the time. A day or two after, I sent Smurov to tell him\
that I would not speak to him again. That\'92s what we call it when two\
schoolfellows refuse to have anything more to do with one another.\
Secretly I only meant to send him to Coventry for a few days and then, if\
I saw signs of repentance, to hold out my hand to him again. That was my\
intention. But what do you think happened? He heard Smurov\'92s message, his\
eyes flashed. \'91Tell Krassotkin from me,\'92 he cried, \'91that I will throw\
bread with pins to all the dogs\'97all\'97all of them!\'92 \'91So he\'92s going in for a\
little temper. We must smoke it out of him.\'92 And I began to treat him with\
contempt; whenever I met him I turned away or smiled sarcastically. And\
just then that affair with his father happened. You remember? You must\
realize that he was fearfully worked up by what had happened already. The\
boys, seeing I\'92d given him up, set on him and taunted him, shouting, \'91Wisp\
of tow, wisp of tow!\'92 And he had soon regular skirmishes with them, which\
I am very sorry for. They seem to have given him one very bad beating. One\
day he flew at them all as they were coming out of school. I stood a few\
yards off, looking on. And, I swear, I don\'92t remember that I laughed; it\
was quite the other way, I felt awfully sorry for him, in another minute I\
would have run up to take his part. But he suddenly met my eyes. I don\'92t\
know what he fancied; but he pulled out a penknife, rushed at me, and\
struck at my thigh, here in my right leg. I didn\'92t move. I don\'92t mind\
owning I am plucky sometimes, Karamazov. I simply looked at him\
contemptuously, as though to say, \'91This is how you repay all my kindness!\
Do it again, if you like, I\'92m at your service.\'92 But he didn\'92t stab me\
again; he broke down, he was frightened at what he had done, he threw away\
the knife, burst out crying, and ran away. I did not sneak on him, of\
course, and I made them all keep quiet, so it shouldn\'92t come to the ears\
of the masters. I didn\'92t even tell my mother till it had healed up. And\
the wound was a mere scratch. And then I heard that the same day he\'92d been\
throwing stones and had bitten your finger\'97but you understand now what a\
state he was in! Well, it can\'92t be helped: it was stupid of me not to come\
and forgive him\'97that is, to make it up with him\'97when he was taken ill. I\
am sorry for it now. But I had a special reason. So now I\'92ve told you all\
about it ... but I\'92m afraid it was stupid of me.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, what a pity,\'94 exclaimed Alyosha, with feeling, \'93that I didn\'92t know\
before what terms you were on with him, or I\'92d have come to you long ago\
to beg you to go to him with me. Would you believe it, when he was\
feverish he talked about you in delirium. I didn\'92t know how much you were\
to him! And you\'92ve really not succeeded in finding that dog? His father\
and the boys have been hunting all over the town for it. Would you believe\
it, since he\'92s been ill, I\'92ve three times heard him repeat with tears,\
\'91It\'92s because I killed Zhutchka, father, that I am ill now. God is\
punishing me for it.\'92 He can\'92t get that idea out of his head. And if the\
dog were found and proved to be alive, one might almost fancy the joy\
would cure him. We have all rested our hopes on you.\'94\
\
\'93Tell me, what made you hope that I should be the one to find him?\'94 Kolya\
asked, with great curiosity. \'93Why did you reckon on me rather than any one\
else?\'94\
\
\'93There was a report that you were looking for the dog, and that you would\
bring it when you\'92d found it. Smurov said something of the sort. We\'92ve all\
been trying to persuade Ilusha that the dog is alive, that it\'92s been seen.\
The boys brought him a live hare; he just looked at it, with a faint\
smile, and asked them to set it free in the fields. And so we did. His\
father has just this moment come back, bringing him a mastiff pup, hoping\
to comfort him with that; but I think it only makes it worse.\'94\
\
\'93Tell me, Karamazov, what sort of man is the father? I know him, but what\
do you make of him\'97a mountebank, a buffoon?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no; there are people of deep feeling who have been somehow crushed.\
Buffoonery in them is a form of resentful irony against those to whom they\
daren\'92t speak the truth, from having been for years humiliated and\
intimidated by them. Believe me, Krassotkin, that sort of buffoonery is\
sometimes tragic in the extreme. His whole life now is centered in Ilusha,\
and if Ilusha dies, he will either go mad with grief or kill himself. I\
feel almost certain of that when I look at him now.\'94\
\
\'93I understand you, Karamazov. I see you understand human nature,\'94 Kolya\
added, with feeling.\
\
\'93And as soon as I saw you with a dog, I thought it was Zhutchka you were\
bringing.\'94\
\
\'93Wait a bit, Karamazov, perhaps we shall find it yet; but this is\
Perezvon. I\'92ll let him go in now and perhaps it will amuse Ilusha more\
than the mastiff pup. Wait a bit, Karamazov, you will know something in a\
minute. But, I say, I am keeping you here!\'94 Kolya cried suddenly. \'93You\'92ve\
no overcoat on in this bitter cold. You see what an egoist I am. Oh, we\
are all egoists, Karamazov!\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t trouble; it is cold, but I don\'92t often catch cold. Let us go in,\
though, and, by the way, what is your name? I know you are called Kolya,\
but what else?\'94\
\
\'93Nikolay\'97Nikolay Ivanovitch Krassotkin, or, as they say in official\
documents, \'91Krassotkin son.\'92 \'94 Kolya laughed for some reason, but added\
suddenly, \'93Of course I hate my name Nikolay.\'94\
\
\'93Why so?\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s so trivial, so ordinary.\'94\
\
\'93You are thirteen?\'94 asked Alyosha.\
\
\'93No, fourteen\'97that is, I shall be fourteen very soon, in a fortnight. I\'92ll\
confess one weakness of mine, Karamazov, just to you, since it\'92s our first\
meeting, so that you may understand my character at once. I hate being\
asked my age, more than that ... and in fact ... there\'92s a libelous story\
going about me, that last week I played robbers with the preparatory boys.\
It\'92s a fact that I did play with them, but it\'92s a perfect libel to say I\
did it for my own amusement. I have reasons for believing that you\'92ve\
heard the story; but I wasn\'92t playing for my own amusement, it was for the\
sake of the children, because they couldn\'92t think of anything to do by\
themselves. But they\'92ve always got some silly tale. This is an awful town\
for gossip, I can tell you.\'94\
\
\'93But what if you had been playing for your own amusement, what\'92s the\
harm?\'94\
\
\'93Come, I say, for my own amusement! You don\'92t play horses, do you?\'94\
\
\'93But you must look at it like this,\'94 said Alyosha, smiling. \'93Grown\uc0\u8208 up\
people go to the theater and there the adventures of all sorts of heroes\
are represented\'97sometimes there are robbers and battles, too\'97and isn\'92t\
that just the same thing, in a different form, of course? And young\
people\'92s games of soldiers or robbers in their playtime are also art in\
its first stage. You know, they spring from the growing artistic instincts\
of the young. And sometimes these games are much better than performances\
in the theater, the only difference is that people go there to look at the\
actors, while in these games the young people are the actors themselves.\
But that\'92s only natural.\'94\
\
\'93You think so? Is that your idea?\'94 Kolya looked at him intently. \'93Oh, you\
know, that\'92s rather an interesting view. When I go home, I\'92ll think it\
over. I\'92ll admit I thought I might learn something from you. I\'92ve come to\
learn of you, Karamazov,\'94 Kolya concluded, in a voice full of spontaneous\
feeling.\
\
\'93And I of you,\'94 said Alyosha, smiling and pressing his hand.\
\
Kolya was much pleased with Alyosha. What struck him most was that he\
treated him exactly like an equal and that he talked to him just as if he\
were \'93quite grown up.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll show you something directly, Karamazov; it\'92s a theatrical\
performance, too,\'94 he said, laughing nervously. \'93That\'92s why I\'92ve come.\'94\
\
\'93Let us go first to the people of the house, on the left. All the boys\
leave their coats in there, because the room is small and hot.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I\'92m only coming in for a minute. I\'92ll keep on my overcoat. Perezvon\
will stay here in the passage and be dead. _Ici_, Perezvon, lie down and\
be dead! You see how he\'92s dead. I\'92ll go in first and explore, then I\'92ll\
whistle to him when I think fit, and you\'92ll see, he\'92ll dash in like mad.\
Only Smurov must not forget to open the door at the moment. I\'92ll arrange\
it all and you\'92ll see something.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter V. By Ilusha\'92s Bedside\
\
\
The room inhabited by the family of the retired captain Snegiryov is\
already familiar to the reader. It was close and crowded at that moment\
with a number of visitors. Several boys were sitting with Ilusha, and\
though all of them, like Smurov, were prepared to deny that it was Alyosha\
who had brought them and reconciled them with Ilusha, it was really the\
fact. All the art he had used had been to take them, one by one, to\
Ilusha, without \'93sheepish sentimentality,\'94 appearing to do so casually and\
without design. It was a great consolation to Ilusha in his suffering. He\
was greatly touched by seeing the almost tender affection and sympathy\
shown him by these boys, who had been his enemies. Krassotkin was the only\
one missing and his absence was a heavy load on Ilusha\'92s heart. Perhaps\
the bitterest of all his bitter memories was his stabbing Krassotkin, who\
had been his one friend and protector. Clever little Smurov, who was the\
first to make it up with Ilusha, thought it was so. But when Smurov hinted\
to Krassotkin that Alyosha wanted to come and see him about something, the\
latter cut him short, bidding Smurov tell \'93Karamazov\'94 at once that he knew\
best what to do, that he wanted no one\'92s advice, and that, if he went to\
see Ilusha, he would choose his own time for he had \'93his own reasons.\'94\
\
That was a fortnight before this Sunday. That was why Alyosha had not been\
to see him, as he had meant to. But though he waited, he sent Smurov to\
him twice again. Both times Krassotkin met him with a curt, impatient\
refusal, sending Alyosha a message not to bother him any more, that if he\
came himself, he, Krassotkin, would not go to Ilusha at all. Up to the\
very last day, Smurov did not know that Kolya meant to go to Ilusha that\
morning, and only the evening before, as he parted from Smurov, Kolya\
abruptly told him to wait at home for him next morning, for he would go\
with him to the Snegiryovs\'92, but warned him on no account to say he was\
coming, as he wanted to drop in casually. Smurov obeyed. Smurov\'92s fancy\
that Kolya would bring back the lost dog was based on the words Kolya had\
dropped that \'93they must be asses not to find the dog, if it was alive.\'94\
When Smurov, waiting for an opportunity, timidly hinted at his guess about\
the dog, Krassotkin flew into a violent rage. \'93I\'92m not such an ass as to\
go hunting about the town for other people\'92s dogs when I\'92ve got a dog of\
my own! And how can you imagine a dog could be alive after swallowing a\
pin? Sheepish sentimentality, that\'92s what it is!\'94\
\
For the last fortnight Ilusha had not left his little bed under the ikons\
in the corner. He had not been to school since the day he met Alyosha and\
bit his finger. He was taken ill the same day, though for a month\
afterwards he was sometimes able to get up and walk about the room and\
passage. But latterly he had become so weak that he could not move without\
help from his father. His father was terribly concerned about him. He even\
gave up drinking and was almost crazy with terror that his boy would die.\
And often, especially after leading him round the room on his arm and\
putting him back to bed, he would run to a dark corner in the passage and,\
leaning his head against the wall, he would break into paroxysms of\
violent weeping, stifling his sobs that they might not be heard by Ilusha.\
\
Returning to the room, he would usually begin doing something to amuse and\
comfort his precious boy; he would tell him stories, funny anecdotes, or\
would mimic comic people he had happened to meet, even imitate the howls\
and cries of animals. But Ilusha could not bear to see his father fooling\
and playing the buffoon. Though the boy tried not to show how he disliked\
it, he saw with an aching heart that his father was an object of contempt,\
and he was continually haunted by the memory of the \'93wisp of tow\'94 and that\
\'93terrible day.\'94\
\
Nina, Ilusha\'92s gentle, crippled sister, did not like her father\'92s\
buffoonery either (Varvara had been gone for some time past to Petersburg\
to study at the university). But the half\uc0\u8208 imbecile mother was greatly\
diverted and laughed heartily when her husband began capering about or\
performing something. It was the only way she could be amused; all the\
rest of the time she was grumbling and complaining that now every one had\
forgotten her, that no one treated her with respect, that she was\
slighted, and so on. But during the last few days she had completely\
changed. She began looking constantly at Ilusha\'92s bed in the corner and\
seemed lost in thought. She was more silent, quieter, and, if she cried,\
she cried quietly so as not to be heard. The captain noticed the change in\
her with mournful perplexity. The boys\'92 visits at first only angered her,\
but later on their merry shouts and stories began to divert her, and at\
last she liked them so much that, if the boys had given up coming, she\
would have felt dreary without them. When the children told some story or\
played a game, she laughed and clapped her hands. She called some of them\
to her and kissed them. She was particularly fond of Smurov.\
\
As for the captain, the presence in his room of the children, who came to\
cheer up Ilusha, filled his heart from the first with ecstatic joy. He\
even hoped that Ilusha would now get over his depression, and that that\
would hasten his recovery. In spite of his alarm about Ilusha, he had not,\
till lately, felt one minute\'92s doubt of his boy\'92s ultimate recovery.\
\
He met his little visitors with homage, waited upon them hand and foot; he\
was ready to be their horse and even began letting them ride on his back,\
but Ilusha did not like the game and it was given up. He began buying\
little things for them, gingerbread and nuts, gave them tea and cut them\
sandwiches. It must be noted that all this time he had plenty of money. He\
had taken the two hundred roubles from Katerina Ivanovna just as Alyosha\
had predicted he would. And afterwards Katerina Ivanovna, learning more\
about their circumstances and Ilusha\'92s illness, visited them herself, made\
the acquaintance of the family, and succeeded in fascinating the half\uc0\u8208 \
imbecile mother. Since then she had been lavish in helping them, and the\
captain, terror\uc0\u8208 stricken at the thought that his boy might be dying,\
forgot his pride and humbly accepted her assistance.\
\
All this time Doctor Herzenstube, who was called in by Katerina Ivanovna,\
came punctually every other day, but little was gained by his visits and\
he dosed the invalid mercilessly. But on that Sunday morning a new doctor\
was expected, who had come from Moscow, where he had a great reputation.\
Katerina Ivanovna had sent for him from Moscow at great expense, not\
expressly for Ilusha, but for another object of which more will be said in\
its place hereafter. But, as he had come, she had asked him to see Ilusha\
as well, and the captain had been told to expect him. He hadn\'92t the\
slightest idea that Kolya Krassotkin was coming, though he had long wished\
for a visit from the boy for whom Ilusha was fretting.\
\
At the moment when Krassotkin opened the door and came into the room, the\
captain and all the boys were round Ilusha\'92s bed, looking at a tiny\
mastiff pup, which had only been born the day before, though the captain\
had bespoken it a week ago to comfort and amuse Ilusha, who was still\
fretting over the lost and probably dead Zhutchka. Ilusha, who had heard\
three days before that he was to be presented with a puppy, not an\
ordinary puppy, but a pedigree mastiff (a very important point, of\
course), tried from delicacy of feeling to pretend that he was pleased.\
But his father and the boys could not help seeing that the puppy only\
served to recall to his little heart the thought of the unhappy dog he had\
killed. The puppy lay beside him feebly moving and he, smiling sadly,\
stroked it with his thin, pale, wasted hand. Clearly he liked the puppy,\
but ... it wasn\'92t Zhutchka; if he could have had Zhutchka and the puppy,\
too, then he would have been completely happy.\
\
\'93Krassotkin!\'94 cried one of the boys suddenly. He was the first to see him\
come in.\
\
Krassotkin\'92s entrance made a general sensation; the boys moved away and\
stood on each side of the bed, so that he could get a full view of Ilusha.\
The captain ran eagerly to meet Kolya.\
\
\'93Please come in ... you are welcome!\'94 he said hurriedly. \'93Ilusha, Mr.\
Krassotkin has come to see you!\'94\
\
But Krassotkin, shaking hands with him hurriedly, instantly showed his\
complete knowledge of the manners of good society. He turned first to the\
captain\'92s wife sitting in her arm\uc0\u8208 chair, who was very ill\u8208 humored at the\
moment, and was grumbling that the boys stood between her and Ilusha\'92s bed\
and did not let her see the new puppy. With the greatest courtesy he made\
her a bow, scraping his foot, and turning to Nina, he made her, as the\
only other lady present, a similar bow. This polite behavior made an\
extremely favorable impression on the deranged lady.\
\
\'93There, you can see at once he is a young man that has been well brought\
up,\'94 she commented aloud, throwing up her hands; \'93but as for our other\
visitors they come in one on the top of another.\'94\
\
\'93How do you mean, mamma, one on the top of another, how is that?\'94 muttered\
the captain affectionately, though a little anxious on her account.\
\
\'93That\'92s how they ride in. They get on each other\'92s shoulders in the\
passage and prance in like that on a respectable family. Strange sort of\
visitors!\'94\
\
\'93But who\'92s come in like that, mamma?\'94\
\
\'93Why, that boy came in riding on that one\'92s back and this one on that\
one\'92s.\'94\
\
Kolya was already by Ilusha\'92s bedside. The sick boy turned visibly paler.\
He raised himself in the bed and looked intently at Kolya. Kolya had not\
seen his little friend for two months, and he was overwhelmed at the sight\
of him. He had never imagined that he would see such a wasted, yellow\
face, such enormous, feverishly glowing eyes and such thin little hands.\
He saw, with grieved surprise, Ilusha\'92s rapid, hard breathing and dry\
lips. He stepped close to him, held out his hand, and almost overwhelmed,\
he said:\
\
\'93Well, old man ... how are you?\'94 But his voice failed him, he couldn\'92t\
achieve an appearance of ease; his face suddenly twitched and the corners\
of his mouth quivered. Ilusha smiled a pitiful little smile, still unable\
to utter a word. Something moved Kolya to raise his hand and pass it over\
Ilusha\'92s hair.\
\
\'93Never mind!\'94 he murmured softly to him to cheer him up, or perhaps not\
knowing why he said it. For a minute they were silent again.\
\
\'93Hallo, so you\'92ve got a new puppy?\'94 Kolya said suddenly, in a most callous\
voice.\
\
\'93Ye\'97es,\'94 answered Ilusha in a long whisper, gasping for breath.\
\
\'93A black nose, that means he\'92ll be fierce, a good house\uc0\u8208 dog,\'94 Kolya\
observed gravely and stolidly, as if the only thing he cared about was the\
puppy and its black nose. But in reality he still had to do his utmost to\
control his feelings not to burst out crying like a child, and do what he\
would he could not control it. \'93When it grows up, you\'92ll have to keep it\
on the chain, I\'92m sure.\'94\
\
\'93He\'92ll be a huge dog!\'94 cried one of the boys.\
\
\'93Of course he will,\'94 \'93a mastiff,\'94 \'93large,\'94 \'93like this,\'94 \'93as big as a\
calf,\'94 shouted several voices.\
\
\'93As big as a calf, as a real calf,\'94 chimed in the captain. \'93I got one like\
that on purpose, one of the fiercest breed, and his parents are huge and\
very fierce, they stand as high as this from the floor.... Sit down here,\
on Ilusha\'92s bed, or here on the bench. You are welcome, we\'92ve been hoping\
to see you a long time.... You were so kind as to come with Alexey\
Fyodorovitch?\'94\
\
Krassotkin sat on the edge of the bed, at Ilusha\'92s feet. Though he had\
perhaps prepared a free\uc0\u8208 and\u8208 easy opening for the conversation on his way,\
now he completely lost the thread of it.\
\
\'93No ... I came with Perezvon. I\'92ve got a dog now, called Perezvon. A\
Slavonic name. He\'92s out there ... if I whistle, he\'92ll run in. I\'92ve brought\
a dog, too,\'94 he said, addressing Ilusha all at once. \'93Do you remember\
Zhutchka, old man?\'94 he suddenly fired the question at him.\
\
Ilusha\'92s little face quivered. He looked with an agonized expression at\
Kolya. Alyosha, standing at the door, frowned and signed to Kolya not to\
speak of Zhutchka, but he did not or would not notice.\
\
\'93Where ... is Zhutchka?\'94 Ilusha asked in a broken voice.\
\
\'93Oh, well, my boy, your Zhutchka\'92s lost and done for!\'94\
\
Ilusha did not speak, but he fixed an intent gaze once more on Kolya.\
Alyosha, catching Kolya\'92s eye, signed to him vigorously again, but he\
turned away his eyes pretending not to have noticed.\
\
\'93It must have run away and died somewhere. It must have died after a meal\
like that,\'94 Kolya pronounced pitilessly, though he seemed a little\
breathless. \'93But I\'92ve got a dog, Perezvon ... A Slavonic name.... I\'92ve\
brought him to show you.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t want him!\'94 said Ilusha suddenly.\
\
\'93No, no, you really must see him ... it will amuse you. I brought him on\
purpose.... He\'92s the same sort of shaggy dog.... You allow me to call in\
my dog, madam?\'94 He suddenly addressed Madame Snegiryov, with inexplicable\
excitement in his manner.\
\
\'93I don\'92t want him, I don\'92t want him!\'94 cried Ilusha, with a mournful break\
in his voice. There was a reproachful light in his eyes.\
\
\'93You\'92d better,\'94 the captain started up from the chest by the wall on which\
he had just sat down, \'93you\'92d better ... another time,\'94 he muttered, but\
Kolya could not be restrained. He hurriedly shouted to Smurov, \'93Open the\
door,\'94 and as soon as it was open, he blew his whistle. Perezvon dashed\
headlong into the room.\
\
\'93Jump, Perezvon, beg! Beg!\'94 shouted Kolya, jumping up, and the dog stood\
erect on its hind\uc0\u8208 legs by Ilusha\'92s bedside. What followed was a surprise\
to every one: Ilusha started, lurched violently forward, bent over\
Perezvon and gazed at him, faint with suspense.\
\
\'93It\'92s ... Zhutchka!\'94 he cried suddenly, in a voice breaking with joy and\
suffering.\
\
\'93And who did you think it was?\'94 Krassotkin shouted with all his might, in\
a ringing, happy voice, and bending down he seized the dog and lifted him\
up to Ilusha.\
\
\'93Look, old man, you see, blind of one eye and the left ear is torn, just\
the marks you described to me. It was by that I found him. I found him\
directly. He did not belong to any one!\'94 he explained, turning quickly to\
the captain, to his wife, to Alyosha and then again to Ilusha. \'93He used to\
live in the Fedotovs\'92 back\uc0\u8208 yard. Though he made his home there, they did\
not feed him. He was a stray dog that had run away from the village ... I\
found him.... You see, old man, he couldn\'92t have swallowed what you gave\
him. If he had, he must have died, he must have! So he must have spat it\
out, since he is alive. You did not see him do it. But the pin pricked his\
tongue, that is why he squealed. He ran away squealing and you thought\
he\'92d swallowed it. He might well squeal, because the skin of dogs\'92 mouths\
is so tender ... tenderer than in men, much tenderer!\'94 Kolya cried\
impetuously, his face glowing and radiant with delight. Ilusha could not\
speak. White as a sheet, he gazed open\uc0\u8208 mouthed at Kolya, with his great\
eyes almost starting out of his head. And if Krassotkin, who had no\
suspicion of it, had known what a disastrous and fatal effect such a\
moment might have on the sick child\'92s health, nothing would have induced\
him to play such a trick on him. But Alyosha was perhaps the only person\
in the room who realized it. As for the captain he behaved like a small\
child.\
\
\'93Zhutchka! It\'92s Zhutchka!\'94 he cried in a blissful voice, \'93Ilusha, this is\
Zhutchka, your Zhutchka! Mamma, this is Zhutchka!\'94 He was almost weeping.\
\
\'93And I never guessed!\'94 cried Smurov regretfully. \'93Bravo, Krassotkin! I\
said he\'92d find the dog and here he\'92s found him.\'94\
\
\'93Here he\'92s found him!\'94 another boy repeated gleefully.\
\
\'93Krassotkin\'92s a brick!\'94 cried a third voice.\
\
\'93He\'92s a brick, he\'92s a brick!\'94 cried the other boys, and they began\
clapping.\
\
\'93Wait, wait,\'94 Krassotkin did his utmost to shout above them all. \'93I\'92ll\
tell you how it happened, that\'92s the whole point. I found him, I took him\
home and hid him at once. I kept him locked up at home and did not show\
him to any one till to\uc0\u8208 day. Only Smurov has known for the last fortnight,\
but I assured him this dog was called Perezvon and he did not guess. And\
meanwhile I taught the dog all sorts of tricks. You should only see all\
the things he can do! I trained him so as to bring you a well\uc0\u8208 trained dog,\
in good condition, old man, so as to be able to say to you, \'91See, old man,\
what a fine dog your Zhutchka is now!\'92 Haven\'92t you a bit of meat? He\'92ll\
show you a trick that will make you die with laughing. A piece of meat,\
haven\'92t you got any?\'94\
\
The captain ran across the passage to the landlady, where their cooking\
was done. Not to lose precious time, Kolya, in desperate haste, shouted to\
Perezvon, \'93Dead!\'94 And the dog immediately turned round and lay on his back\
with its four paws in the air. The boys laughed. Ilusha looked on with the\
same suffering smile, but the person most delighted with the dog\'92s\
performance was \'93mamma.\'94 She laughed at the dog and began snapping her\
fingers and calling it, \'93Perezvon, Perezvon!\'94\
\
\'93Nothing will make him get up, nothing!\'94 Kolya cried triumphantly, proud\
of his success. \'93He won\'92t move for all the shouting in the world, but if I\
call to him, he\'92ll jump up in a minute. Ici, Perezvon!\'94 The dog leapt up\
and bounded about, whining with delight. The captain ran back with a piece\
of cooked beef.\
\
\'93Is it hot?\'94 Kolya inquired hurriedly, with a business\uc0\u8208 like air, taking\
the meat. \'93Dogs don\'92t like hot things. No, it\'92s all right. Look,\
everybody, look, Ilusha, look, old man; why aren\'92t you looking? He does\
not look at him, now I\'92ve brought him.\'94\
\
The new trick consisted in making the dog stand motionless with his nose\
out and putting a tempting morsel of meat just on his nose. The luckless\
dog had to stand without moving, with the meat on his nose, as long as his\
master chose to keep him, without a movement, perhaps for half an hour.\
But he kept Perezvon only for a brief moment.\
\
\'93Paid for!\'94 cried Kolya, and the meat passed in a flash from the dog\'92s\
nose to his mouth. The audience, of course, expressed enthusiasm and\
surprise.\
\
\'93Can you really have put off coming all this time simply to train the\
dog?\'94 exclaimed Alyosha, with an involuntary note of reproach in his\
voice.\
\
\'93Simply for that!\'94 answered Kolya, with perfect simplicity. \'93I wanted to\
show him in all his glory.\'94\
\
\'93Perezvon! Perezvon,\'94 called Ilusha suddenly, snapping his thin fingers\
and beckoning to the dog.\
\
\'93What is it? Let him jump up on the bed! _Ici_, Perezvon!\'94 Kolya slapped\
the bed and Perezvon darted up by Ilusha. The boy threw both arms round\
his head and Perezvon instantly licked his cheek. Ilusha crept close to\
him, stretched himself out in bed and hid his face in the dog\'92s shaggy\
coat.\
\
\'93Dear, dear!\'94 kept exclaiming the captain. Kolya sat down again on the\
edge of the bed.\
\
\'93Ilusha, I can show you another trick. I\'92ve brought you a little cannon.\
You remember, I told you about it before and you said how much you\'92d like\
to see it. Well, here, I\'92ve brought it to you.\'94\
\
And Kolya hurriedly pulled out of his satchel the little bronze cannon. He\
hurried, because he was happy himself. Another time he would have waited\
till the sensation made by Perezvon had passed off, now he hurried on\
regardless of all consideration. \'93You are all happy now,\'94 he felt, \'93so\
here\'92s something to make you happier!\'94 He was perfectly enchanted himself.\
\
\'93I\'92ve been coveting this thing for a long while; it\'92s for you, old man,\
it\'92s for you. It belonged to Morozov, it was no use to him, he had it from\
his brother. I swopped a book from father\'92s book\uc0\u8208 case for it, _A Kinsman\
of Mahomet or Salutary Folly_, a scandalous book published in Moscow a\
hundred years ago, before they had any censorship. And Morozov has a taste\
for such things. He was grateful to me, too....\'94\
\
Kolya held the cannon in his hand so that all could see and admire it.\
Ilusha raised himself, and, with his right arm still round the dog, he\
gazed enchanted at the toy. The sensation was even greater when Kolya\
announced that he had gunpowder too, and that it could be fired off at\
once \'93if it won\'92t alarm the ladies.\'94 \'93Mamma\'94 immediately asked to look at\
the toy closer and her request was granted. She was much pleased with the\
little bronze cannon on wheels and began rolling it to and fro on her lap.\
She readily gave permission for the cannon to be fired, without any idea\
of what she had been asked. Kolya showed the powder and the shot. The\
captain, as a military man, undertook to load it, putting in a minute\
quantity of powder. He asked that the shot might be put off till another\
time. The cannon was put on the floor, aiming towards an empty part of the\
room, three grains of powder were thrust into the touch\uc0\u8208 hole and a match\
was put to it. A magnificent explosion followed. Mamma was startled, but\
at once laughed with delight. The boys gazed in speechless triumph. But\
the captain, looking at Ilusha, was more enchanted than any of them. Kolya\
picked up the cannon and immediately presented it to Ilusha, together with\
the powder and the shot.\
\
\'93I got it for you, for you! I\'92ve been keeping it for you a long time,\'94 he\
repeated once more in his delight.\
\
\'93Oh, give it to me! No, give me the cannon!\'94 mamma began begging like a\
little child. Her face showed a piteous fear that she would not get it.\
Kolya was disconcerted. The captain fidgeted uneasily.\
\
\'93Mamma, mamma,\'94 he ran to her, \'93the cannon\'92s yours, of course, but let\
Ilusha have it, because it\'92s a present to him, but it\'92s just as good as\
yours. Ilusha will always let you play with it; it shall belong to both of\
you, both of you.\'94\
\
\'93No, I don\'92t want it to belong to both of us, I want it to be mine\
altogether, not Ilusha\'92s,\'94 persisted mamma, on the point of tears.\
\
\'93Take it, mother, here, keep it!\'94 Ilusha cried. \'93Krassotkin, may I give it\
to my mother?\'94 he turned to Krassotkin with an imploring face, as though\
he were afraid he might be offended at his giving his present to some one\
else.\
\
\'93Of course you may,\'94 Krassotkin assented heartily, and, taking the cannon\
from Ilusha, he handed it himself to mamma with a polite bow. She was so\
touched that she cried.\
\
\'93Ilusha, darling, he\'92s the one who loves his mamma!\'94 she said tenderly,\
and at once began wheeling the cannon to and fro on her lap again.\
\
\'93Mamma, let me kiss your hand.\'94 The captain darted up to her at once and\
did so.\
\
\'93And I never saw such a charming fellow as this nice boy,\'94 said the\
grateful lady, pointing to Krassotkin.\
\
\'93And I\'92ll bring you as much powder as you like, Ilusha. We make the powder\
ourselves now. Borovikov found out how it\'92s made\'97twenty\uc0\u8208 four parts of\
saltpeter, ten of sulphur and six of birchwood charcoal. It\'92s all pounded\
together, mixed into a paste with water and rubbed through a tammy\
sieve\'97that\'92s how it\'92s done.\'94\
\
\'93Smurov told me about your powder, only father says it\'92s not real\
gunpowder,\'94 responded Ilusha.\
\
\'93Not real?\'94 Kolya flushed. \'93It burns. I don\'92t know, of course.\'94\
\
\'93No, I didn\'92t mean that,\'94 put in the captain with a guilty face. \'93I only\
said that real powder is not made like that, but that\'92s nothing, it can be\
made so.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know, you know best. We lighted some in a pomatum pot, it burned\
splendidly, it all burnt away leaving only a tiny ash. But that was only\
the paste, and if you rub it through ... but of course you know best, I\
don\'92t know.... And Bulkin\'92s father thrashed him on account of our powder,\
did you hear?\'94 he turned to Ilusha.\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 answered Ilusha. He listened to Kolya with immense interest and\
enjoyment.\
\
\'93We had prepared a whole bottle of it and he used to keep it under his\
bed. His father saw it. He said it might explode, and thrashed him on the\
spot. He was going to make a complaint against me to the masters. He is\
not allowed to go about with me now, no one is allowed to go about with me\
now. Smurov is not allowed to either, I\'92ve got a bad name with every one.\
They say I\'92m a \'91desperate character,\'92 \'94 Kolya smiled scornfully. \'93It all\
began from what happened on the railway.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, we\'92ve heard of that exploit of yours, too,\'94 cried the captain. \'93How\
could you lie still on the line? Is it possible you weren\'92t the least\
afraid, lying there under the train? Weren\'92t you frightened?\'94\
\
The captain was abject in his flattery of Kolya.\
\
\'93N\'97not particularly,\'94 answered Kolya carelessly. \'93What\'92s blasted my\
reputation more than anything here was that cursed goose,\'94 he said,\
turning again to Ilusha. But though he assumed an unconcerned air as he\
talked, he still could not control himself and was continually missing the\
note he tried to keep up.\
\
\'93Ah! I heard about the goose!\'94 Ilusha laughed, beaming all over. \'93They\
told me, but I didn\'92t understand. Did they really take you to the court?\'94\
\
\'93The most stupid, trivial affair, they made a mountain of a molehill as\
they always do,\'94 Kolya began carelessly. \'93I was walking through the\
market\uc0\u8208 place here one day, just when they\'92d driven in the geese. I stopped\
and looked at them. All at once a fellow, who is an errand\uc0\u8208 boy at\
Plotnikov\'92s now, looked at me and said, \'91What are you looking at the geese\
for?\'92 I looked at him; he was a stupid, moon\uc0\u8208 faced fellow of twenty. I am\
always on the side of the peasantry, you know. I like talking to the\
peasants.... We\'92ve dropped behind the peasants\'97that\'92s an axiom. I believe\
you are laughing, Karamazov?\'94\
\
\'93No, Heaven forbid, I am listening,\'94 said Alyosha with a most good\uc0\u8208 natured\
air, and the sensitive Kolya was immediately reassured.\
\
\'93My theory, Karamazov, is clear and simple,\'94 he hurried on again, looking\
pleased. \'93I believe in the people and am always glad to give them their\
due, but I am not for spoiling them, that is a _sine qua non_ ... But I\
was telling you about the goose. So I turned to the fool and answered, \'91I\
am wondering what the goose thinks about.\'92 He looked at me quite stupidly,\
\'91And what does the goose think about?\'92 he asked. \'91Do you see that cart\
full of oats?\'92 I said. \'91The oats are dropping out of the sack, and the\
goose has put its neck right under the wheel to gobble them up\'97do you\
see?\'92 \'91I see that quite well,\'92 he said. \'91Well,\'92 said I, \'91if that cart were\
to move on a little, would it break the goose\'92s neck or not?\'92 \'91It\'92d be\
sure to break it,\'92 and he grinned all over his face, highly delighted.\
\'91Come on, then,\'92 said I, \'91let\'92s try.\'92 \'91Let\'92s,\'92 he said. And it did not\
take us long to arrange: he stood at the bridle without being noticed, and\
I stood on one side to direct the goose. And the owner wasn\'92t looking, he\
was talking to some one, so I had nothing to do, the goose thrust its head\
in after the oats of itself, under the cart, just under the wheel. I\
winked at the lad, he tugged at the bridle, and crack. The goose\'92s neck\
was broken in half. And, as luck would have it, all the peasants saw us at\
that moment and they kicked up a shindy at once. \'91You did that on\
purpose!\'92 \'91No, not on purpose.\'92 \'91Yes, you did, on purpose!\'92 Well, they\
shouted, \'91Take him to the justice of the peace!\'92 They took me, too. \'91You\
were there, too,\'92 they said, \'91you helped, you\'92re known all over the\
market!\'92 And, for some reason, I really am known all over the market,\'94\
Kolya added conceitedly. \'93We all went off to the justice\'92s, they brought\
the goose, too. The fellow was crying in a great funk, simply blubbering\
like a woman. And the farmer kept shouting that you could kill any number\
of geese like that. Well, of course, there were witnesses. The justice of\
the peace settled it in a minute, that the farmer was to be paid a rouble\
for the goose, and the fellow to have the goose. And he was warned not to\
play such pranks again. And the fellow kept blubbering like a woman. \'91It\
wasn\'92t me,\'92 he said, \'91it was he egged me on,\'92 and he pointed to me. I\
answered with the utmost composure that I hadn\'92t egged him on, that I\
simply stated the general proposition, had spoken hypothetically. The\
justice of the peace smiled and was vexed with himself at once for having\
smiled. \'91I\'92ll complain to your masters of you, so that for the future you\
mayn\'92t waste your time on such general propositions, instead of sitting at\
your books and learning your lessons.\'92 He didn\'92t complain to the masters,\
that was a joke, but the matter was noised abroad and came to the ears of\
the masters. Their ears are long, you know! The classical master,\
Kolbasnikov, was particularly shocked about it, but Dardanelov got me off\
again. But Kolbasnikov is savage with every one now like a green ass. Did\
you know, Ilusha, he is just married, got a dowry of a thousand roubles,\
and his bride\'92s a regular fright of the first rank and the last degree.\
The third\uc0\u8208 class fellows wrote an epigram on it:\
\
\
    Astounding news has reached the class,\
    Kolbasnikov has been an ass.\
\
\
And so on, awfully funny, I\'92ll bring it to you later on. I say nothing\
against Dardanelov, he is a learned man, there\'92s no doubt about it. I\
respect men like that and it\'92s not because he stood up for me.\'94\
\
\'93But you took him down about the founders of Troy!\'94 Smurov put in\
suddenly, unmistakably proud of Krassotkin at such a moment. He was\
particularly pleased with the story of the goose.\
\
\'93Did you really take him down?\'94 the captain inquired, in a flattering way.\
\'93On the question who founded Troy? We heard of it, Ilusha told me about it\
at the time.\'94\
\
\'93He knows everything, father, he knows more than any of us!\'94 put in\
Ilusha; \'93he only pretends to be like that, but really he is top in every\
subject....\'94\
\
Ilusha looked at Kolya with infinite happiness.\
\
\'93Oh, that\'92s all nonsense about Troy, a trivial matter. I consider this an\
unimportant question,\'94 said Kolya with haughty humility. He had by now\
completely recovered his dignity, though he was still a little uneasy. He\
felt that he was greatly excited and that he had talked about the goose,\
for instance, with too little reserve, while Alyosha had looked serious\
and had not said a word all the time. And the vain boy began by degrees to\
have a rankling fear that Alyosha was silent because he despised him, and\
thought he was showing off before him. If he dared to think anything like\
that Kolya would\'97\
\
\'93I regard the question as quite a trivial one,\'94 he rapped out again,\
proudly.\
\
\'93And I know who founded Troy,\'94 a boy, who had not spoken before, said\
suddenly, to the surprise of every one. He was silent and seemed to be\
shy. He was a pretty boy of about eleven, called Kartashov. He was sitting\
near the door. Kolya looked at him with dignified amazement.\
\
The fact was that the identity of the founders of Troy had become a secret\
for the whole school, a secret which could only be discovered by reading\
Smaragdov, and no one had Smaragdov but Kolya. One day, when Kolya\'92s back\
was turned, Kartashov hastily opened Smaragdov, which lay among Kolya\'92s\
books, and immediately lighted on the passage relating to the foundation\
of Troy. This was a good time ago, but he felt uneasy and could not bring\
himself to announce publicly that he too knew who had founded Troy, afraid\
of what might happen and of Krassotkin\'92s somehow putting him to shame over\
it. But now he couldn\'92t resist saying it. For weeks he had been longing\
to.\
\
\'93Well, who did found it?\'94 asked Kolya, turning to him with haughty\
superciliousness. He saw from his face that he really did know and at once\
made up his mind how to take it. There was, so to speak, a discordant note\
in the general harmony.\
\
\'93Troy was founded by Teucer, Dardanus, Ilius and Tros,\'94 the boy rapped out\
at once, and in the same instant he blushed, blushed so, that it was\
painful to look at him. But the boys stared at him, stared at him for a\
whole minute, and then all the staring eyes turned at once and were\
fastened upon Kolya, who was still scanning the audacious boy with\
disdainful composure.\
\
\'93In what sense did they found it?\'94 he deigned to comment at last. \'93And\
what is meant by founding a city or a state? What do they do? Did they go\
and each lay a brick, do you suppose?\'94\
\
There was laughter. The offending boy turned from pink to crimson. He was\
silent and on the point of tears. Kolya held him so for a minute.\
\
\'93Before you talk of a historical event like the foundation of a\
nationality, you must first understand what you mean by it,\'94 he admonished\
him in stern, incisive tones. \'93But I attach no consequence to these old\
wives\'92 tales and I don\'92t think much of universal history in general,\'94 he\
added carelessly, addressing the company generally.\
\
\'93Universal history?\'94 the captain inquired, looking almost scared.\
\
\'93Yes, universal history! It\'92s the study of the successive follies of\
mankind and nothing more. The only subjects I respect are mathematics and\
natural science,\'94 said Kolya. He was showing off and he stole a glance at\
Alyosha; his was the only opinion he was afraid of there. But Alyosha was\
still silent and still serious as before. If Alyosha had said a word it\
would have stopped him, but Alyosha was silent and \'93it might be the\
silence of contempt,\'94 and that finally irritated Kolya.\
\
\'93The classical languages, too ... they are simply madness, nothing more.\
You seem to disagree with me again, Karamazov?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t agree,\'94 said Alyosha, with a faint smile.\
\
\'93The study of the classics, if you ask my opinion, is simply a police\
measure, that\'92s simply why it has been introduced into our schools.\'94 By\
degrees Kolya began to get breathless again. \'93Latin and Greek were\
introduced because they are a bore and because they stupefy the intellect.\
It was dull before, so what could they do to make things duller? It was\
senseless enough before, so what could they do to make it more senseless?\
So they thought of Greek and Latin. That\'92s my opinion, I hope I shall\
never change it,\'94 Kolya finished abruptly. His cheeks were flushed.\
\
\'93That\'92s true,\'94 assented Smurov suddenly, in a ringing tone of conviction.\
He had listened attentively.\
\
\'93And yet he is first in Latin himself,\'94 cried one of the group of boys\
suddenly.\
\
\'93Yes, father, he says that and yet he is first in Latin,\'94 echoed Ilusha.\
\
\'93What of it?\'94 Kolya thought fit to defend himself, though the praise was\
very sweet to him. \'93I am fagging away at Latin because I have to, because\
I promised my mother to pass my examination, and I think that whatever you\
do, it\'92s worth doing it well. But in my soul I have a profound contempt\
for the classics and all that fraud.... You don\'92t agree, Karamazov?\'94\
\
\'93Why \'91fraud\'92?\'94 Alyosha smiled again.\
\
\'93Well, all the classical authors have been translated into all languages,\
so it was not for the sake of studying the classics they introduced Latin,\
but solely as a police measure, to stupefy the intelligence. So what can\
one call it but a fraud?\'94\
\
\'93Why, who taught you all this?\'94 cried Alyosha, surprised at last.\
\
\'93In the first place I am capable of thinking for myself without being\
taught. Besides, what I said just now about the classics being translated\
our teacher Kolbasnikov has said to the whole of the third class.\'94\
\
\'93The doctor has come!\'94 cried Nina, who had been silent till then.\
\
A carriage belonging to Madame Hohlakov drove up to the gate. The captain,\
who had been expecting the doctor all the morning, rushed headlong out to\
meet him. \'93Mamma\'94 pulled herself together and assumed a dignified air.\
Alyosha went up to Ilusha and began setting his pillows straight. Nina,\
from her invalid chair, anxiously watched him putting the bed tidy. The\
boys hurriedly took leave. Some of them promised to come again in the\
evening. Kolya called Perezvon and the dog jumped off the bed.\
\
\'93I won\'92t go away, I won\'92t go away,\'94 Kolya said hastily to Ilusha. \'93I\'92ll\
wait in the passage and come back when the doctor\'92s gone, I\'92ll come back\
with Perezvon.\'94\
\
But by now the doctor had entered, an important\uc0\u8208 looking person with long,\
dark whiskers and a shiny, shaven chin, wearing a bearskin coat. As he\
crossed the threshold he stopped, taken aback; he probably fancied he had\
come to the wrong place. \'93How is this? Where am I?\'94 he muttered, not\
removing his coat nor his peaked sealskin cap. The crowd, the poverty of\
the room, the washing hanging on a line in the corner, puzzled him. The\
captain, bent double, was bowing low before him.\
\
\'93It\'92s here, sir, here, sir,\'94 he muttered cringingly; \'93it\'92s here, you\'92ve\
come right, you were coming to us...\'94\
\
\'93Sne\uc0\u8208 gi\u8208 ryov?\'94 the doctor said loudly and pompously. \'93Mr. Snegiryov\'97is\
that you?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s me, sir!\'94\
\
\'93Ah!\'94\
\
The doctor looked round the room with a squeamish air once more and threw\
off his coat, displaying to all eyes the grand decoration at his neck. The\
captain caught the fur coat in the air, and the doctor took off his cap.\
\
\'93Where is the patient?\'94 he asked emphatically.\
\
\
\
Chapter VI. Precocity\
\
\
\'93What do you think the doctor will say to him?\'94 Kolya asked quickly. \'93What\
a repulsive mug, though, hasn\'92t he? I can\'92t endure medicine!\'94\
\
\'93Ilusha is dying. I think that\'92s certain,\'94 answered Alyosha, mournfully.\
\
\'93They are rogues! Medicine\'92s a fraud! I am glad to have made your\
acquaintance, though, Karamazov. I wanted to know you for a long time. I\
am only sorry we meet in such sad circumstances.\'94\
\
Kolya had a great inclination to say something even warmer and more\
demonstrative, but he felt ill at ease. Alyosha noticed this, smiled, and\
pressed his hand.\
\
\'93I\'92ve long learned to respect you as a rare person,\'94 Kolya muttered again,\
faltering and uncertain. \'93I have heard you are a mystic and have been in\
the monastery. I know you are a mystic, but ... that hasn\'92t put me off.\
Contact with real life will cure you.... It\'92s always so with characters\
like yours.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean by mystic? Cure me of what?\'94 Alyosha was rather\
astonished.\
\
\'93Oh, God and all the rest of it.\'94\
\
\'93What, don\'92t you believe in God?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I\'92ve nothing against God. Of course, God is only a hypothesis, but\
... I admit that He is needed ... for the order of the universe and all\
that ... and that if there were no God He would have to be invented,\'94\
added Kolya, beginning to blush. He suddenly fancied that Alyosha might\
think he was trying to show off his knowledge and to prove that he was\
\'93grown up.\'94 \'93I haven\'92t the slightest desire to show off my knowledge to\
him,\'94 Kolya thought indignantly. And all of a sudden he felt horribly\
annoyed.\
\
\'93I must confess I can\'92t endure entering on such discussions,\'94 he said with\
a final air. \'93It\'92s possible for one who doesn\'92t believe in God to love\
mankind, don\'92t you think so? Voltaire didn\'92t believe in God and loved\
mankind?\'94 (\'93I am at it again,\'94 he thought to himself.)\
\
\'93Voltaire believed in God, though not very much, I think, and I don\'92t\
think he loved mankind very much either,\'94 said Alyosha quietly, gently,\
and quite naturally, as though he were talking to some one of his own age,\
or even older. Kolya was particularly struck by Alyosha\'92s apparent\
diffidence about his opinion of Voltaire. He seemed to be leaving the\
question for him, little Kolya, to settle.\
\
\'93Have you read Voltaire?\'94 Alyosha finished.\
\
\'93No, not to say read.... But I\'92ve read _Candide_ in the Russian\
translation ... in an absurd, grotesque, old translation ... (At it again!\
again!)\'94\
\
\'93And did you understand it?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, yes, everything.... That is ... Why do you suppose I shouldn\'92t\
understand it? There\'92s a lot of nastiness in it, of course.... Of course I\
can understand that it\'92s a philosophical novel and written to advocate an\
idea....\'94 Kolya was getting mixed by now. \'93I am a Socialist, Karamazov, I\
am an incurable Socialist,\'94 he announced suddenly, apropos of nothing.\
\
\'93A Socialist?\'94 laughed Alyosha. \'93But when have you had time to become one?\
Why, I thought you were only thirteen?\'94\
\
Kolya winced.\
\
\'93In the first place I am not thirteen, but fourteen, fourteen in a\
fortnight,\'94 he flushed angrily, \'93and in the second place I am at a\
complete loss to understand what my age has to do with it? The question is\
what are my convictions, not what is my age, isn\'92t it?\'94\
\
\'93When you are older, you\'92ll understand for yourself the influence of age\
on convictions. I fancied, too, that you were not expressing your own\
ideas,\'94 Alyosha answered serenely and modestly, but Kolya interrupted him\
hotly:\
\
\'93Come, you want obedience and mysticism. You must admit that the Christian\
religion, for instance, has only been of use to the rich and the powerful\
to keep the lower classes in slavery. That\'92s so, isn\'92t it?\'94\
\
\'93Ah, I know where you read that, and I am sure some one told you so!\'94\
cried Alyosha.\
\
\'93I say, what makes you think I read it? And certainly no one told me so. I\
can think for myself.... I am not opposed to Christ, if you like. He was a\
most humane person, and if He were alive to\uc0\u8208 day, He would be found in the\
ranks of the revolutionists, and would perhaps play a conspicuous part....\
There\'92s no doubt about that.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, where, where did you get that from? What fool have you made friends\
with?\'94 exclaimed Alyosha.\
\
\'93Come, the truth will out! It has so chanced that I have often talked to\
Mr. Rakitin, of course, but ... old Byelinsky said that, too, so they\
say.\'94\
\
\'93Byelinsky? I don\'92t remember. He hasn\'92t written that anywhere.\'94\
\
\'93If he didn\'92t write it, they say he said it. I heard that from a ... but\
never mind.\'94\
\
\'93And have you read Byelinsky?\'94\
\
\'93Well, no ... I haven\'92t read all of him, but ... I read the passage about\
Tatyana, why she didn\'92t go off with Onyegin.\'94\
\
\'93Didn\'92t go off with Onyegin? Surely you don\'92t ... understand that\
already?\'94\
\
\'93Why, you seem to take me for little Smurov,\'94 said Kolya, with a grin of\
irritation. \'93But please don\'92t suppose I am such a revolutionist. I often\
disagree with Mr. Rakitin. Though I mention Tatyana, I am not at all for\
the emancipation of women. I acknowledge that women are a subject race and\
must obey. _Les femmes tricottent_, as Napoleon said.\'94 Kolya, for some\
reason, smiled, \'93And on that question at least I am quite of one mind with\
that pseudo\uc0\u8208 great man. I think, too, that to leave one\'92s own country and\
fly to America is mean, worse than mean\'97silly. Why go to America when one\
may be of great service to humanity here? Now especially. There\'92s a\
perfect mass of fruitful activity open to us. That\'92s what I answered.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean? Answered whom? Has some one suggested your going to\
America already?\'94\
\
\'93I must own, they\'92ve been at me to go, but I declined. That\'92s between\
ourselves, of course, Karamazov; do you hear, not a word to any one. I say\
this only to you. I am not at all anxious to fall into the clutches of the\
secret police and take lessons at the Chain bridge.\
\
\
    _Long will you remember_\
    _The house at the Chain bridge._\
\
\
Do you remember? It\'92s splendid. Why are you laughing? You don\'92t suppose I\
am fibbing, do you?\'94 (\'93What if he should find out that I\'92ve only that one\
number of _The Bell_ in father\'92s bookcase, and haven\'92t read any more of\
it?\'94 Kolya thought with a shudder.)\
\
\'93Oh, no, I am not laughing and don\'92t suppose for a moment that you are\
lying. No, indeed, I can\'92t suppose so, for all this, alas! is perfectly\
true. But tell me, have you read Pushkin\'97_Onyegin_, for instance?... You\
spoke just now of Tatyana.\'94\
\
\'93No, I haven\'92t read it yet, but I want to read it. I have no prejudices,\
Karamazov; I want to hear both sides. What makes you ask?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, nothing.\'94\
\
\'93Tell me, Karamazov, have you an awful contempt for me?\'94 Kolya rapped out\
suddenly and drew himself up before Alyosha, as though he were on drill.\
\'93Be so kind as to tell me, without beating about the bush.\'94\
\
\'93I have a contempt for you?\'94 Alyosha looked at him wondering. \'93What for? I\
am only sad that a charming nature such as yours should be perverted by\
all this crude nonsense before you have begun life.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t be anxious about my nature,\'94 Kolya interrupted, not without\
complacency. \'93But it\'92s true that I am stupidly sensitive, crudely\
sensitive. You smiled just now, and I fancied you seemed to\'97\'94\
\
\'93Oh, my smile meant something quite different. I\'92ll tell you why I smiled.\
Not long ago I read the criticism made by a German who had lived in\
Russia, on our students and schoolboys of to\uc0\u8208 day. \'91Show a Russian\
schoolboy,\'92 he writes, \'91a map of the stars, which he knows nothing about,\
and he will give you back the map next day with corrections on it.\'92 No\
knowledge and unbounded conceit\'97that\'92s what the German meant to say about\
the Russian schoolboy.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, that\'92s perfectly right,\'94 Kolya laughed suddenly, \'93exactly so! Bravo\
the German! But he did not see the good side, what do you think? Conceit\
may be, that comes from youth, that will be corrected if need be, but, on\
the other hand, there is an independent spirit almost from childhood,\
boldness of thought and conviction, and not the spirit of these sausage\
makers, groveling before authority.... But the German was right all the\
same. Bravo the German! But Germans want strangling all the same. Though\
they are so good at science and learning they must be strangled.\'94\
\
\'93Strangled, what for?\'94 smiled Alyosha.\
\
\'93Well, perhaps I am talking nonsense, I agree. I am awfully childish\
sometimes, and when I am pleased about anything I can\'92t restrain myself\
and am ready to talk any stuff. But, I say, we are chattering away here\
about nothing, and that doctor has been a long time in there. But perhaps\
he\'92s examining the mamma and that poor crippled Nina. I liked that Nina,\
you know. She whispered to me suddenly as I was coming away, \'91Why didn\'92t\
you come before?\'92 And in such a voice, so reproachfully! I think she is\
awfully nice and pathetic.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, yes! Well, you\'92ll be coming often, you will see what she is like. It\
would do you a great deal of good to know people like that, to learn to\
value a great deal which you will find out from knowing these people,\'94\
Alyosha observed warmly. \'93That would have more effect on you than\
anything.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, how I regret and blame myself for not having come sooner!\'94 Kolya\
exclaimed, with bitter feeling.\
\
\'93Yes, it\'92s a great pity. You saw for yourself how delighted the poor child\
was to see you. And how he fretted for you to come!\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t tell me! You make it worse! But it serves me right. What kept me\
from coming was my conceit, my egoistic vanity, and the beastly\
wilfullness, which I never can get rid of, though I\'92ve been struggling\
with it all my life. I see that now. I am a beast in lots of ways,\
Karamazov!\'94\
\
\'93No, you have a charming nature, though it\'92s been distorted, and I quite\
understand why you have had such an influence on this generous, morbidly\
sensitive boy,\'94 Alyosha answered warmly.\
\
\'93And you say that to me!\'94 cried Kolya; \'93and would you believe it, I\
thought\'97I\'92ve thought several times since I\'92ve been here\'97that you despised\
me! If only you knew how I prize your opinion!\'94\
\
\'93But are you really so sensitive? At your age! Would you believe it, just\
now, when you were telling your story, I thought, as I watched you, that\
you must be very sensitive!\'94\
\
\'93You thought so? What an eye you\'92ve got, I say! I bet that was when I was\
talking about the goose. That was just when I was fancying you had a great\
contempt for me for being in such a hurry to show off, and for a moment I\
quite hated you for it, and began talking like a fool. Then I fancied\'97just\
now, here\'97when I said that if there were no God He would have to be\
invented, that I was in too great a hurry to display my knowledge,\
especially as I got that phrase out of a book. But I swear I wasn\'92t\
showing off out of vanity, though I really don\'92t know why. Because I was\
so pleased? Yes, I believe it was because I was so pleased ... though it\'92s\
perfectly disgraceful for any one to be gushing directly they are pleased,\
I know that. But I am convinced now that you don\'92t despise me; it was all\
my imagination. Oh, Karamazov, I am profoundly unhappy. I sometimes fancy\
all sorts of things, that every one is laughing at me, the whole world,\
and then I feel ready to overturn the whole order of things.\'94\
\
\'93And you worry every one about you,\'94 smiled Alyosha.\
\
\'93Yes, I worry every one about me, especially my mother. Karamazov, tell\
me, am I very ridiculous now?\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t think about that, don\'92t think of it at all!\'94 cried Alyosha. \'93And\
what does ridiculous mean? Isn\'92t every one constantly being or seeming\
ridiculous? Besides, nearly all clever people now are fearfully afraid of\
being ridiculous, and that makes them unhappy. All I am surprised at is\
that you should be feeling that so early, though I\'92ve observed it for some\
time past, and not only in you. Nowadays the very children have begun to\
suffer from it. It\'92s almost a sort of insanity. The devil has taken the\
form of that vanity and entered into the whole generation; it\'92s simply the\
devil,\'94 added Alyosha, without a trace of the smile that Kolya, staring at\
him, expected to see. \'93You are like every one else,\'94 said Alyosha, in\
conclusion, \'93that is, like very many others. Only you must not be like\
everybody else, that\'92s all.\'94\
\
\'93Even if every one is like that?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, even if every one is like that. You be the only one not like it. You\
really are not like every one else, here you are not ashamed to confess to\
something bad and even ridiculous. And who will admit so much in these\
days? No one. And people have even ceased to feel the impulse to self\uc0\u8208 \
criticism. Don\'92t be like every one else, even if you are the only one.\'94\
\
\'93Splendid! I was not mistaken in you. You know how to console one. Oh, how\
I have longed to know you, Karamazov! I\'92ve long been eager for this\
meeting. Can you really have thought about me, too? You said just now that\
you thought of me, too?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I\'92d heard of you and had thought of you, too ... and if it\'92s partly\
vanity that makes you ask, it doesn\'92t matter.\'94\
\
\'93Do you know, Karamazov, our talk has been like a declaration of love,\'94\
said Kolya, in a bashful and melting voice. \'93That\'92s not ridiculous, is\
it?\'94\
\
\'93Not at all ridiculous, and if it were, it wouldn\'92t matter, because it\'92s\
been a good thing.\'94 Alyosha smiled brightly.\
\
\'93But do you know, Karamazov, you must admit that you are a little ashamed\
yourself, now.... I see it by your eyes.\'94 Kolya smiled with a sort of sly\
happiness.\
\
\'93Why ashamed?\'94\
\
\'93Well, why are you blushing?\'94\
\
\'93It was you made me blush,\'94 laughed Alyosha, and he really did blush. \'93Oh,\
well, I am a little, goodness knows why, I don\'92t know...\'94 he muttered,\
almost embarrassed.\
\
\'93Oh, how I love you and admire you at this moment just because you are\
rather ashamed! Because you are just like me,\'94 cried Kolya, in positive\
ecstasy. His cheeks glowed, his eyes beamed.\
\
\'93You know, Kolya, you will be very unhappy in your life,\'94 something made\
Alyosha say suddenly.\
\
\'93I know, I know. How you know it all beforehand!\'94 Kolya agreed at once.\
\
\'93But you will bless life on the whole, all the same.\'94\
\
\'93Just so, hurrah! You are a prophet. Oh, we shall get on together,\
Karamazov! Do you know, what delights me most, is that you treat me quite\
like an equal. But we are not equals, no, we are not, you are better! But\
we shall get on. Do you know, all this last month, I\'92ve been saying to\
myself, \'91Either we shall be friends at once, for ever, or we shall part\
enemies to the grave!\'92 \'94\
\
\'93And saying that, of course, you loved me,\'94 Alyosha laughed gayly.\
\
\'93I did. I loved you awfully. I\'92ve been loving and dreaming of you. And how\
do you know it all beforehand? Ah, here\'92s the doctor. Goodness! What will\
he tell us? Look at his face!\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter VII. Ilusha\
\
\
The doctor came out of the room again, muffled in his fur coat and with\
his cap on his head. His face looked almost angry and disgusted, as though\
he were afraid of getting dirty. He cast a cursory glance round the\
passage, looking sternly at Alyosha and Kolya as he did so. Alyosha waved\
from the door to the coachman, and the carriage that had brought the\
doctor drove up. The captain darted out after the doctor, and, bowing\
apologetically, stopped him to get the last word. The poor fellow looked\
utterly crushed; there was a scared look in his eyes.\
\
\'93Your Excellency, your Excellency ... is it possible?\'94 he began, but could\
not go on and clasped his hands in despair. Yet he still gazed imploringly\
at the doctor, as though a word from him might still change the poor boy\'92s\
fate.\
\
\'93I can\'92t help it, I am not God!\'94 the doctor answered offhand, though with\
the customary impressiveness.\
\
\'93Doctor ... your Excellency ... and will it be soon, soon?\'94\
\
\'93You must be prepared for anything,\'94 said the doctor in emphatic and\
incisive tones, and dropping his eyes, he was about to step out to the\
coach.\
\
\'93Your Excellency, for Christ\'92s sake!\'94 the terror\uc0\u8208 stricken captain stopped\
him again. \'93Your Excellency! but can nothing, absolutely nothing save him\
now?\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s not in my hands now,\'94 said the doctor impatiently, \'93but h\'92m!...\'94 he\
stopped suddenly. \'93If you could, for instance ... send ... your patient\
... at once, without delay\'94 (the words \'93at once, without delay,\'94 the\
doctor uttered with an almost wrathful sternness that made the captain\
start) \'93to Syracuse, the change to the new be\uc0\u8208 ne\u8208 ficial climatic\
conditions might possibly effect\'97\'94\
\
\'93To Syracuse!\'94 cried the captain, unable to grasp what was said.\
\
\'93Syracuse is in Sicily,\'94 Kolya jerked out suddenly in explanation. The\
doctor looked at him.\
\
\'93Sicily! your Excellency,\'94 faltered the captain, \'93but you\'92ve seen\'94\'97he\
spread out his hands, indicating his surroundings\'97\'93mamma and my family?\'94\
\
\'93N\'97no, Sicily is not the place for the family, the family should go to\
Caucasus in the early spring ... your daughter must go to the Caucasus,\
and your wife ... after a course of the waters in the Caucasus for her\
rheumatism ... must be sent straight to Paris to the mental specialist\
Lepelletier; I could give you a note to him, and then ... there might be a\
change\'97\'94\
\
\'93Doctor, doctor! But you see!\'94 The captain flung wide his hands again\
despairingly, indicating the bare wooden walls of the passage.\
\
\'93Well, that\'92s not my business,\'94 grinned the doctor. \'93I have only told you\
the answer of medical science to your question as to possible treatment.\
As for the rest, to my regret\'97\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t be afraid, apothecary, my dog won\'92t bite you,\'94 Kolya rapped out\
loudly, noticing the doctor\'92s rather uneasy glance at Perezvon, who was\
standing in the doorway. There was a wrathful note in Kolya\'92s voice. He\
used the word apothecary instead of doctor on purpose, and, as he\
explained afterwards, used it \'93to insult him.\'94\
\
\'93What\'92s that?\'94 The doctor flung up his head, staring with surprise at\
Kolya. \'93Who\'92s this?\'94 he addressed Alyosha, as though asking him to\
explain.\
\
\'93It\'92s Perezvon\'92s master, don\'92t worry about me,\'94 Kolya said incisively\
again.\
\
\'93Perezvon?\'94(7) repeated the doctor, perplexed.\
\
\'93He hears the bell, but where it is he cannot tell. Good\uc0\u8208 by, we shall meet\
in Syracuse.\'94\
\
\'93Who\'92s this? Who\'92s this?\'94 The doctor flew into a terrible rage.\
\
\'93He is a schoolboy, doctor, he is a mischievous boy; take no notice of\
him,\'94 said Alyosha, frowning and speaking quickly. \'93Kolya, hold your\
tongue!\'94 he cried to Krassotkin. \'93Take no notice of him, doctor,\'94 he\
repeated, rather impatiently.\
\
\'93He wants a thrashing, a good thrashing!\'94 The doctor stamped in a perfect\
fury.\
\
\'93And you know, apothecary, my Perezvon might bite!\'94 said Kolya, turning\
pale, with quivering voice and flashing eyes. \'93_Ici_, Perezvon!\'94\
\
\'93Kolya, if you say another word, I\'92ll have nothing more to do with you,\'94\
Alyosha cried peremptorily.\
\
\'93There is only one man in the world who can command Nikolay\
Krassotkin\'97this is the man\'94; Kolya pointed to Alyosha. \'93I obey him, good\uc0\u8208 \
by!\'94\
\
He stepped forward, opened the door, and quickly went into the inner room.\
Perezvon flew after him. The doctor stood still for five seconds in\
amazement, looking at Alyosha; then, with a curse, he went out quickly to\
the carriage, repeating aloud, \'93This is ... this is ... I don\'92t know what\
it is!\'94 The captain darted forward to help him into the carriage. Alyosha\
followed Kolya into the room. He was already by Ilusha\'92s bedside. The sick\
boy was holding his hand and calling for his father. A minute later the\
captain, too, came back.\
\
\'93Father, father, come ... we ...\'94 Ilusha faltered in violent excitement,\
but apparently unable to go on, he flung his wasted arms round his father\
and Kolya, uniting them in one embrace, and hugging them as tightly as he\
could. The captain suddenly began to shake with dumb sobs, and Kolya\'92s\
lips and chin twitched.\
\
\'93Father, father! How sorry I am for you!\'94 Ilusha moaned bitterly.\
\
\'93Ilusha ... darling ... the doctor said ... you would be all right ... we\
shall be happy ... the doctor ...\'94 the captain began.\
\
\'93Ah, father! I know what the new doctor said to you about me.... I saw!\'94\
cried Ilusha, and again he hugged them both with all his strength, hiding\
his face on his father\'92s shoulder.\
\
\'93Father, don\'92t cry, and when I die get a good boy, another one ... choose\
one of them all, a good one, call him Ilusha and love him instead of\
me....\'94\
\
\'93Hush, old man, you\'92ll get well,\'94 Krassotkin cried suddenly, in a voice\
that sounded angry.\
\
\'93But don\'92t ever forget me, father,\'94 Ilusha went on, \'93come to my grave ...\
and, father, bury me by our big stone, where we used to go for our walk,\
and come to me there with Krassotkin in the evening ... and Perezvon ... I\
shall expect you.... Father, father!\'94\
\
His voice broke. They were all three silent, still embracing. Nina was\
crying quietly in her chair, and at last seeing them all crying, \'93mamma,\'94\
too, burst into tears.\
\
\'93Ilusha! Ilusha!\'94 she exclaimed.\
\
Krassotkin suddenly released himself from Ilusha\'92s embrace.\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by, old man, mother expects me back to dinner,\'94 he said quickly.\
\'93What a pity I did not tell her! She will be dreadfully anxious.... But\
after dinner I\'92ll come back to you for the whole day, for the whole\
evening, and I\'92ll tell you all sorts of things, all sorts of things. And\
I\'92ll bring Perezvon, but now I will take him with me, because he will\
begin to howl when I am away and bother you. Good\uc0\u8208 by!\'94\
\
And he ran out into the passage. He didn\'92t want to cry, but in the passage\
he burst into tears. Alyosha found him crying.\
\
\'93Kolya, you must be sure to keep your word and come, or he will be\
terribly disappointed,\'94 Alyosha said emphatically.\
\
\'93I will! Oh, how I curse myself for not having come before!\'94 muttered\
Kolya, crying, and no longer ashamed of it.\
\
At that moment the captain flew out of the room, and at once closed the\
door behind him. His face looked frenzied, his lips were trembling. He\
stood before the two and flung up his arms.\
\
\'93I don\'92t want a good boy! I don\'92t want another boy!\'94 he muttered in a wild\
whisper, clenching his teeth. \'93If I forget thee, Jerusalem, may my\
tongue\'97\'94 He broke off with a sob and sank on his knees before the wooden\
bench. Pressing his fists against his head, he began sobbing with absurd\
whimpering cries, doing his utmost that his cries should not be heard in\
the room.\
\
Kolya ran out into the street.\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by, Karamazov? Will you come yourself?\'94 he cried sharply and angrily\
to Alyosha.\
\
\'93I will certainly come in the evening.\'94\
\
\'93What was that he said about Jerusalem?... What did he mean by that?\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s from the Bible. \'91If I forget thee, Jerusalem,\'92 that is, if I forget\
all that is most precious to me, if I let anything take its place, then\
may\'97\'94\
\
\'93I understand, that\'92s enough! Mind you come! _Ici_, Perezvon!\'94 he cried\
with positive ferocity to the dog, and with rapid strides he went home.\
\
\
\
\
Book XI. Ivan\
\
\
\
Chapter I. At Grushenka\'92s\
\
\
Alyosha went towards the cathedral square to the widow Morozov\'92s house to\
see Grushenka, who had sent Fenya to him early in the morning with an\
urgent message begging him to come. Questioning Fenya, Alyosha learned\
that her mistress had been particularly distressed since the previous day.\
During the two months that had passed since Mitya\'92s arrest, Alyosha had\
called frequently at the widow Morozov\'92s house, both from his own\
inclination and to take messages for Mitya. Three days after Mitya\'92s\
arrest, Grushenka was taken very ill and was ill for nearly five weeks.\
For one whole week she was unconscious. She was very much changed\'97thinner\
and a little sallow, though she had for the past fortnight been well\
enough to go out. But to Alyosha her face was even more attractive than\
before, and he liked to meet her eyes when he went in to her. A look of\
firmness and intelligent purpose had developed in her face. There were\
signs of a spiritual transformation in her, and a steadfast, fine and\
humble determination that nothing could shake could be discerned in her.\
There was a small vertical line between her brows which gave her charming\
face a look of concentrated thought, almost austere at the first glance.\
There was scarcely a trace of her former frivolity.\
\
It seemed strange to Alyosha, too, that in spite of the calamity that had\
overtaken the poor girl, betrothed to a man who had been arrested for a\
terrible crime, almost at the instant of their betrothal, in spite of her\
illness and the almost inevitable sentence hanging over Mitya, Grushenka\
had not yet lost her youthful cheerfulness. There was a soft light in the\
once proud eyes, though at times they gleamed with the old vindictive fire\
when she was visited by one disturbing thought stronger than ever in her\
heart. The object of that uneasiness was the same as ever\'97Katerina\
Ivanovna, of whom Grushenka had even raved when she lay in delirium.\
Alyosha knew that she was fearfully jealous of her. Yet Katerina Ivanovna\
had not once visited Mitya in his prison, though she might have done it\
whenever she liked. All this made a difficult problem for Alyosha, for he\
was the only person to whom Grushenka opened her heart and from whom she\
was continually asking advice. Sometimes he was unable to say anything.\
\
Full of anxiety he entered her lodging. She was at home. She had returned\
from seeing Mitya half an hour before, and from the rapid movement with\
which she leapt up from her chair to meet him he saw that she had been\
expecting him with great impatience. A pack of cards dealt for a game of\
\'93fools\'94 lay on the table. A bed had been made up on the leather sofa on\
the other side and Maximov lay, half\uc0\u8208 reclining, on it. He wore a dressing\u8208 \
gown and a cotton nightcap, and was evidently ill and weak, though he was\
smiling blissfully. When the homeless old man returned with Grushenka from\
Mokroe two months before, he had simply stayed on and was still staying\
with her. He arrived with her in rain and sleet, sat down on the sofa,\
drenched and scared, and gazed mutely at her with a timid, appealing\
smile. Grushenka, who was in terrible grief and in the first stage of\
fever, almost forgot his existence in all she had to do the first half\uc0\u8208 \
hour after her arrival. Suddenly she chanced to look at him intently: he\
laughed a pitiful, helpless little laugh. She called Fenya and told her to\
give him something to eat. All that day he sat in the same place, almost\
without stirring. When it got dark and the shutters were closed, Fenya\
asked her mistress:\
\
\'93Is the gentleman going to stay the night, mistress?\'94\
\
\'93Yes; make him a bed on the sofa,\'94 answered Grushenka.\
\
Questioning him more in detail, Grushenka learned from him that he had\
literally nowhere to go, and that \'93Mr. Kalganov, my benefactor, told me\
straight that he wouldn\'92t receive me again and gave me five roubles.\'94\
\
\'93Well, God bless you, you\'92d better stay, then,\'94 Grushenka decided in her\
grief, smiling compassionately at him. Her smile wrung the old man\'92s heart\
and his lips twitched with grateful tears. And so the destitute wanderer\
had stayed with her ever since. He did not leave the house even when she\
was ill. Fenya and her grandmother, the cook, did not turn him out, but\
went on serving him meals and making up his bed on the sofa. Grushenka had\
grown used to him, and coming back from seeing Mitya (whom she had begun\
to visit in prison before she was really well) she would sit down and\
begin talking to \'93Maximushka\'94 about trifling matters, to keep her from\
thinking of her sorrow. The old man turned out to be a good story\uc0\u8208 teller\
on occasions, so that at last he became necessary to her. Grushenka saw\
scarcely any one else beside Alyosha, who did not come every day and never\
stayed long. Her old merchant lay seriously ill at this time, \'93at his last\
gasp\'94 as they said in the town, and he did, in fact, die a week after\
Mitya\'92s trial. Three weeks before his death, feeling the end approaching,\
he made his sons, their wives and children, come upstairs to him at last\
and bade them not leave him again. From that moment he gave strict orders\
to his servants not to admit Grushenka and to tell her if she came, \'93The\
master wishes you long life and happiness and tells you to forget him.\'94\
But Grushenka sent almost every day to inquire after him.\
\
\'93You\'92ve come at last!\'94 she cried, flinging down the cards and joyfully\
greeting Alyosha, \'93and Maximushka\'92s been scaring me that perhaps you\
wouldn\'92t come. Ah, how I need you! Sit down to the table. What will you\
have\'97coffee?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, please,\'94 said Alyosha, sitting down at the table. \'93I am very\
hungry.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s right. Fenya, Fenya, coffee,\'94 cried Grushenka. \'93It\'92s been made a\
long time ready for you. And bring some little pies, and mind they are\
hot. Do you know, we\'92ve had a storm over those pies to\uc0\u8208 day. I took them to\
the prison for him, and would you believe it, he threw them back to me: he\
would not eat them. He flung one of them on the floor and stamped on it.\
So I said to him: \'91I shall leave them with the warder; if you don\'92t eat\
them before evening, it will be that your venomous spite is enough for\
you!\'92 With that I went away. We quarreled again, would you believe it?\
Whenever I go we quarrel.\'94\
\
Grushenka said all this in one breath in her agitation. Maximov, feeling\
nervous, at once smiled and looked on the floor.\
\
\'93What did you quarrel about this time?\'94 asked Alyosha.\
\
\'93I didn\'92t expect it in the least. Only fancy, he is jealous of the Pole.\
\'91Why are you keeping him?\'92 he said. \'91So you\'92ve begun keeping him.\'92 He is\
jealous, jealous of me all the time, jealous eating and sleeping! He even\
took it into his head to be jealous of Kuzma last week.\'94\
\
\'93But he knew about the Pole before?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, but there it is. He has known about him from the very beginning, but\
to\uc0\u8208 day he suddenly got up and began scolding about him. I am ashamed to\
repeat what he said. Silly fellow! Rakitin went in as I came out. Perhaps\
Rakitin is egging him on. What do you think?\'94 she added carelessly.\
\
\'93He loves you, that\'92s what it is: he loves you so much. And now he is\
particularly worried.\'94\
\
\'93I should think he might be, with the trial to\uc0\u8208 morrow. And I went to him\
to say something about to\uc0\u8208 morrow, for I dread to think what\'92s going to\
happen then. You say that he is worried, but how worried I am! And he\
talks about the Pole! He\'92s too silly! He is not jealous of Maximushka yet,\
anyway.\'94\
\
\'93My wife was dreadfully jealous over me, too,\'94 Maximov put in his word.\
\
\'93Jealous of you?\'94 Grushenka laughed in spite of herself. \'93Of whom could\
she have been jealous?\'94\
\
\'93Of the servant girls.\'94\
\
\'93Hold your tongue, Maximushka, I am in no laughing mood now; I feel angry.\
Don\'92t ogle the pies. I shan\'92t give you any; they are not good for you, and\
I won\'92t give you any vodka either. I have to look after him, too, just as\
though I kept an almshouse,\'94 she laughed.\
\
\'93I don\'92t deserve your kindness. I am a worthless creature,\'94 said Maximov,\
with tears in his voice. \'93You would do better to spend your kindness on\
people of more use than me.\'94\
\
\'93Ech, every one is of use, Maximushka, and how can we tell who\'92s of most\
use? If only that Pole didn\'92t exist, Alyosha. He\'92s taken it into his head\
to fall ill, too, to\uc0\u8208 day. I\'92ve been to see him also. And I shall send him\
some pies, too, on purpose. I hadn\'92t sent him any, but Mitya accused me of\
it, so now I shall send some! Ah, here\'92s Fenya with a letter! Yes, it\'92s\
from the Poles\'97begging again!\'94\
\
Pan Mussyalovitch had indeed sent an extremely long and characteristically\
eloquent letter in which he begged her to lend him three roubles. In the\
letter was enclosed a receipt for the sum, with a promise to repay it\
within three months, signed by Pan Vrublevsky as well. Grushenka had\
received many such letters, accompanied by such receipts, from her former\
lover during the fortnight of her convalescence. But she knew that the two\
Poles had been to ask after her health during her illness. The first\
letter Grushenka got from them was a long one, written on large notepaper\
and with a big family crest on the seal. It was so obscure and rhetorical\
that Grushenka put it down before she had read half, unable to make head\
or tail of it. She could not attend to letters then. The first letter was\
followed next day by another in which Pan Mussyalovitch begged her for a\
loan of two thousand roubles for a very short period. Grushenka left that\
letter, too, unanswered. A whole series of letters had followed\'97one every\
day\'97all as pompous and rhetorical, but the loan asked for, gradually\
diminishing, dropped to a hundred roubles, then to twenty\uc0\u8208 five, to ten,\
and finally Grushenka received a letter in which both the Poles begged her\
for only one rouble and included a receipt signed by both.\
\
Then Grushenka suddenly felt sorry for them, and at dusk she went round\
herself to their lodging. She found the two Poles in great poverty, almost\
destitution, without food or fuel, without cigarettes, in debt to their\
landlady. The two hundred roubles they had carried off from Mitya at\
Mokroe had soon disappeared. But Grushenka was surprised at their meeting\
her with arrogant dignity and self\uc0\u8208 assertion, with the greatest punctilio\
and pompous speeches. Grushenka simply laughed, and gave her former\
admirer ten roubles. Then, laughing, she told Mitya of it and he was not\
in the least jealous. But ever since, the Poles had attached themselves to\
Grushenka and bombarded her daily with requests for money and she had\
always sent them small sums. And now that day Mitya had taken it into his\
head to be fearfully jealous.\
\
\'93Like a fool, I went round to him just for a minute, on the way to see\
Mitya, for he is ill, too, my Pole,\'94 Grushenka began again with nervous\
haste. \'93I was laughing, telling Mitya about it. \'91Fancy,\'92 I said, \'91my Pole\
had the happy thought to sing his old songs to me to the guitar. He\
thought I would be touched and marry him!\'92 Mitya leapt up swearing.... So,\
there, I\'92ll send them the pies! Fenya, is it that little girl they\'92ve\
sent? Here, give her three roubles and pack a dozen pies up in a paper and\
tell her to take them. And you, Alyosha, be sure to tell Mitya that I did\
send them the pies.\'94\
\
\'93I wouldn\'92t tell him for anything,\'94 said Alyosha, smiling.\
\
\'93Ech! You think he is unhappy about it. Why, he\'92s jealous on purpose. He\
doesn\'92t care,\'94 said Grushenka bitterly.\
\
\'93On purpose?\'94 queried Alyosha.\
\
\'93I tell you you are silly, Alyosha. You know nothing about it, with all\
your cleverness. I am not offended that he is jealous of a girl like me. I\
would be offended if he were not jealous. I am like that. I am not\
offended at jealousy. I have a fierce heart, too. I can be jealous myself.\
Only what offends me is that he doesn\'92t love me at all. I tell you he is\
jealous now _on purpose_. Am I blind? Don\'92t I see? He began talking to me\
just now of that woman, of Katerina, saying she was this and that, how she\
had ordered a doctor from Moscow for him, to try and save him; how she had\
ordered the best counsel, the most learned one, too. So he loves her, if\
he\'92ll praise her to my face, more shame to him! He\'92s treated me badly\
himself, so he attacked me, to make out I am in fault first and to throw\
it all on me. \'91You were with your Pole before me, so I can\'92t be blamed for\
Katerina,\'92 that\'92s what it amounts to. He wants to throw the whole blame on\
me. He attacked me on purpose, on purpose, I tell you, but I\'92ll\'97\'94\
\
Grushenka could not finish saying what she would do. She hid her eyes in\
her handkerchief and sobbed violently.\
\
\'93He doesn\'92t love Katerina Ivanovna,\'94 said Alyosha firmly.\
\
\'93Well, whether he loves her or not, I\'92ll soon find out for myself,\'94 said\
Grushenka, with a menacing note in her voice, taking the handkerchief from\
her eyes. Her face was distorted. Alyosha saw sorrowfully that from being\
mild and serene, it had become sullen and spiteful.\
\
\'93Enough of this foolishness,\'94 she said suddenly; \'93it\'92s not for that I sent\
for you. Alyosha, darling, to\uc0\u8208 morrow\'97what will happen to\u8208 morrow? That\'92s\
what worries me! And it\'92s only me it worries! I look at every one and no\
one is thinking of it. No one cares about it. Are you thinking about it\
even? To\uc0\u8208 morrow he\'92ll be tried, you know. Tell me, how will he be tried?\
You know it\'92s the valet, the valet killed him! Good heavens! Can they\
condemn him in place of the valet and will no one stand up for him? They\
haven\'92t troubled the valet at all, have they?\'94\
\
\'93He\'92s been severely cross\uc0\u8208 examined,\'94 observed Alyosha thoughtfully; \'93but\
every one came to the conclusion it was not he. Now he is lying very ill.\
He has been ill ever since that attack. Really ill,\'94 added Alyosha.\
\
\'93Oh, dear! couldn\'92t you go to that counsel yourself and tell him the whole\
thing by yourself? He\'92s been brought from Petersburg for three thousand\
roubles, they say.\'94\
\
\'93We gave these three thousand together\'97Ivan, Katerina Ivanovna and I\'97but\
she paid two thousand for the doctor from Moscow herself. The counsel\
Fetyukovitch would have charged more, but the case has become known all\
over Russia; it\'92s talked of in all the papers and journals. Fetyukovitch\
agreed to come more for the glory of the thing, because the case has\
become so notorious. I saw him yesterday.\'94\
\
\'93Well? Did you talk to him?\'94 Grushenka put in eagerly.\
\
\'93He listened and said nothing. He told me that he had already formed his\
opinion. But he promised to give my words consideration.\'94\
\
\'93Consideration! Ah, they are swindlers! They\'92ll ruin him. And why did she\
send for the doctor?\'94\
\
\'93As an expert. They want to prove that Mitya\'92s mad and committed the\
murder when he didn\'92t know what he was doing\'94; Alyosha smiled gently; \'93but\
Mitya won\'92t agree to that.\'94\
\
\'93Yes; but that would be the truth if he had killed him!\'94 cried Grushenka.\
\'93He was mad then, perfectly mad, and that was my fault, wretch that I am!\
But, of course, he didn\'92t do it, he didn\'92t do it! And they are all against\
him, the whole town. Even Fenya\'92s evidence went to prove he had done it.\
And the people at the shop, and that official, and at the tavern, too,\
before, people had heard him say so! They are all, all against him, all\
crying out against him.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, there\'92s a fearful accumulation of evidence,\'94 Alyosha observed\
grimly.\
\
\'93And Grigory\'97Grigory Vassilyevitch\'97sticks to his story that the door was\
open, persists that he saw it\'97there\'92s no shaking him. I went and talked to\
him myself. He\'92s rude about it, too.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, that\'92s perhaps the strongest evidence against him,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93And as for Mitya\'92s being mad, he certainly seems like it now,\'94 Grushenka\
began with a peculiarly anxious and mysterious air. \'93Do you know, Alyosha,\
I\'92ve been wanting to talk to you about it for a long time. I go to him\
every day and simply wonder at him. Tell me, now, what do you suppose he\'92s\
always talking about? He talks and talks and I can make nothing of it. I\
fancied he was talking of something intellectual that I couldn\'92t\
understand in my foolishness. Only he suddenly began talking to me about a\
babe\'97that is, about some child. \'91Why is the babe poor?\'92 he said. \'91It\'92s for\
that babe I am going to Siberia now. I am not a murderer, but I must go to\
Siberia!\'92 What that meant, what babe, I couldn\'92t tell for the life of me.\
Only I cried when he said it, because he said it so nicely. He cried\
himself, and I cried, too. He suddenly kissed me and made the sign of the\
cross over me. What did it mean, Alyosha, tell me? What is this babe?\'94\
\
\'93It must be Rakitin, who\'92s been going to see him lately,\'94 smiled Alyosha,\
\'93though ... that\'92s not Rakitin\'92s doing. I didn\'92t see Mitya yesterday. I\'92ll\
see him to\uc0\u8208 day.\'94\
\
\'93No, it\'92s not Rakitin; it\'92s his brother Ivan Fyodorovitch upsetting him.\
It\'92s his going to see him, that\'92s what it is,\'94 Grushenka began, and\
suddenly broke off. Alyosha gazed at her in amazement.\
\
\'93Ivan\'92s going? Has he been to see him? Mitya told me himself that Ivan\
hasn\'92t been once.\'94\
\
\'93There ... there! What a girl I am! Blurting things out!\'94 exclaimed\
Grushenka, confused and suddenly blushing. \'93Stay, Alyosha, hush! Since\
I\'92ve said so much I\'92ll tell the whole truth\'97he\'92s been to see him twice,\
the first directly he arrived. He galloped here from Moscow at once, of\
course, before I was taken ill; and the second time was a week ago. He\
told Mitya not to tell you about it, under any circumstances; and not to\
tell any one, in fact. He came secretly.\'94\
\
Alyosha sat plunged in thought, considering something. The news evidently\
impressed him.\
\
\'93Ivan doesn\'92t talk to me of Mitya\'92s case,\'94 he said slowly. \'93He\'92s said very\
little to me these last two months. And whenever I go to see him, he seems\
vexed at my coming, so I\'92ve not been to him for the last three weeks.\
H\'92m!... if he was there a week ago ... there certainly has been a change\
in Mitya this week.\'94\
\
\'93There has been a change,\'94 Grushenka assented quickly. \'93They have a\
secret, they have a secret! Mitya told me himself there was a secret, and\
such a secret that Mitya can\'92t rest. Before then, he was cheerful\'97and,\
indeed, he is cheerful now\'97but when he shakes his head like that, you\
know, and strides about the room and keeps pulling at the hair on his\
right temple with his right hand, I know there is something on his mind\
worrying him.... I know! He was cheerful before, though, indeed, he is\
cheerful to\uc0\u8208 day.\'94\
\
\'93But you said he was worried.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, he is worried and yet cheerful. He keeps on being irritable for a\
minute and then cheerful and then irritable again. And you know, Alyosha,\
I am constantly wondering at him\'97with this awful thing hanging over him,\
he sometimes laughs at such trifles as though he were a baby himself.\'94\
\
\'93And did he really tell you not to tell me about Ivan? Did he say, \'91Don\'92t\
tell him\'92?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, he told me, \'91Don\'92t tell him.\'92 It\'92s you that Mitya\'92s most afraid of.\
Because it\'92s a secret: he said himself it was a secret. Alyosha, darling,\
go to him and find out what their secret is and come and tell me,\'94\
Grushenka besought him with sudden eagerness. \'93Set my mind at rest that I\
may know the worst that\'92s in store for me. That\'92s why I sent for you.\'94\
\
\'93You think it\'92s something to do with you? If it were, he wouldn\'92t have\
told you there was a secret.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know. Perhaps he wants to tell me, but doesn\'92t dare to. He warns\
me. There is a secret, he tells me, but he won\'92t tell me what it is.\'94\
\
\'93What do you think yourself?\'94\
\
\'93What do I think? It\'92s the end for me, that\'92s what I think. They all three\
have been plotting my end, for Katerina\'92s in it. It\'92s all Katerina, it all\
comes from her. She is this and that, and that means that I am not. He\
tells me that beforehand\'97warns me. He is planning to throw me over, that\'92s\
the whole secret. They\'92ve planned it together, the three of them\'97Mitya,\
Katerina, and Ivan Fyodorovitch. Alyosha, I\'92ve been wanting to ask you a\
long time. A week ago he suddenly told me that Ivan was in love with\
Katerina, because he often goes to see her. Did he tell me the truth or\
not? Tell me, on your conscience, tell me the worst.\'94\
\
\'93I won\'92t tell you a lie. Ivan is not in love with Katerina Ivanovna, I\
think.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, that\'92s what I thought! He is lying to me, shameless deceiver, that\'92s\
what it is! And he was jealous of me just now, so as to put the blame on\
me afterwards. He is stupid, he can\'92t disguise what he is doing; he is so\
open, you know.... But I\'92ll give it to him, I\'92ll give it to him! \'91You\
believe I did it,\'92 he said. He said that to me, to me. He reproached me\
with that! God forgive him! You wait, I\'92ll make it hot for Katerina at the\
trial! I\'92ll just say a word then ... I\'92ll tell everything then!\'94\
\
And again she cried bitterly.\
\
\'93This I can tell you for certain, Grushenka,\'94 Alyosha said, getting up.\
\'93First, that he loves you, loves you more than any one in the world, and\
you only, believe me. I know. I do know. The second thing is that I don\'92t\
want to worm his secret out of him, but if he\'92ll tell me of himself to\uc0\u8208 \
day, I shall tell him straight out that I have promised to tell you. Then\
I\'92ll come to you to\uc0\u8208 day, and tell you. Only ... I fancy ... Katerina\
Ivanovna has nothing to do with it, and that the secret is about something\
else. That\'92s certain. It isn\'92t likely it\'92s about Katerina Ivanovna, it\
seems to me. Good\uc0\u8208 by for now.\'94\
\
Alyosha shook hands with her. Grushenka was still crying. He saw that she\
put little faith in his consolation, but she was better for having had her\
sorrow out, for having spoken of it. He was sorry to leave her in such a\
state of mind, but he was in haste. He had a great many things to do\
still.\
\
\
\
Chapter II. The Injured Foot\
\
\
The first of these things was at the house of Madame Hohlakov, and he\
hurried there to get it over as quickly as possible and not be too late\
for Mitya. Madame Hohlakov had been slightly ailing for the last three\
weeks: her foot had for some reason swollen up, and though she was not in\
bed, she lay all day half\uc0\u8208 reclining on the couch in her boudoir, in a\
fascinating but decorous _d\'e9shabill\'e9_. Alyosha had once noted with\
innocent amusement that, in spite of her illness, Madame Hohlakov had\
begun to be rather dressy\'97top\uc0\u8208 knots, ribbons, loose wrappers, had made\
their appearance, and he had an inkling of the reason, though he dismissed\
such ideas from his mind as frivolous. During the last two months the\
young official, Perhotin, had become a regular visitor at the house.\
\
Alyosha had not called for four days and he was in haste to go straight to\
Lise, as it was with her he had to speak, for Lise had sent a maid to him\
the previous day, specially asking him to come to her \'93about something\
very important,\'94 a request which, for certain reasons, had interest for\
Alyosha. But while the maid went to take his name in to Lise, Madame\
Hohlakov heard of his arrival from some one, and immediately sent to beg\
him to come to her \'93just for one minute.\'94 Alyosha reflected that it was\
better to accede to the mamma\'92s request, or else she would be sending down\
to Lise\'92s room every minute that he was there. Madame Hohlakov was lying\
on a couch. She was particularly smartly dressed and was evidently in a\
state of extreme nervous excitement. She greeted Alyosha with cries of\
rapture.\
\
\'93It\'92s ages, ages, perfect ages since I\'92ve seen you! It\'92s a whole week\'97only\
think of it! Ah, but you were here only four days ago, on Wednesday. You\
have come to see Lise. I\'92m sure you meant to slip into her room on tiptoe,\
without my hearing you. My dear, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, if you only\
knew how worried I am about her! But of that later, though that\'92s the most\
important thing, of that later. Dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, I trust you\
implicitly with my Lise. Since the death of Father Zossima\'97God rest his\
soul!\'94 (she crossed herself)\'97\'93I look upon you as a monk, though you look\
charming in your new suit. Where did you find such a tailor in these\
parts? No, no, that\'92s not the chief thing\'97of that later. Forgive me for\
sometimes calling you Alyosha; an old woman like me may take liberties,\'94\
she smiled coquettishly; \'93but that will do later, too. The important thing\
is that I shouldn\'92t forget what is important. Please remind me of it\
yourself. As soon as my tongue runs away with me, you just say \'91the\
important thing?\'92 Ach! how do I know now what is of most importance? Ever\
since Lise took back her promise\'97her childish promise, Alexey\
Fyodorovitch\'97to marry you, you\'92ve realized, of course, that it was only\
the playful fancy of a sick child who had been so long confined to her\
chair\'97thank God, she can walk now!... that new doctor Katya sent for from\
Moscow for your unhappy brother, who will to\uc0\u8208 morrow\'97But why speak of to\u8208 \
morrow? I am ready to die at the very thought of to\uc0\u8208 morrow. Ready to die\
of curiosity.... That doctor was with us yesterday and saw Lise.... I paid\
him fifty roubles for the visit. But that\'92s not the point, that\'92s not the\
point again. You see, I\'92m mixing everything up. I am in such a hurry. Why\
am I in a hurry? I don\'92t understand. It\'92s awful how I seem growing unable\
to understand anything. Everything seems mixed up in a sort of tangle. I\
am afraid you are so bored you will jump up and run away, and that will be\
all I shall see of you. Goodness! Why are we sitting here and no coffee?\
Yulia, Glafira, coffee!\'94\
\
Alyosha made haste to thank her, and said that he had only just had\
coffee.\
\
\'93Where?\'94\
\
\'93At Agrafena Alexandrovna\'92s.\'94\
\
\'93At ... at that woman\'92s? Ah, it\'92s she has brought ruin on every one. I\
know nothing about it though. They say she has become a saint, though it\'92s\
rather late in the day. She had better have done it before. What use is it\
now? Hush, hush, Alexey Fyodorovitch, for I have so much to say to you\
that I am afraid I shall tell you nothing. This awful trial ... I shall\
certainly go, I am making arrangements. I shall be carried there in my\
chair; besides I can sit up. I shall have people with me. And, you know, I\
am a witness. How shall I speak, how shall I speak? I don\'92t know what I\
shall say. One has to take an oath, hasn\'92t one?\'94\
\
\'93Yes; but I don\'92t think you will be able to go.\'94\
\
\'93I can sit up. Ah, you put me out! Ah! this trial, this savage act, and\
then they are all going to Siberia, some are getting married, and all this\
so quickly, so quickly, everything\'92s changing, and at last\'97nothing. All\
grow old and have death to look forward to. Well, so be it! I am weary.\
This Katya, _cette charmante personne_, has disappointed all my hopes. Now\
she is going to follow one of your brothers to Siberia, and your other\
brother is going to follow her, and will live in the nearest town, and\
they will all torment one another. It drives me out of my mind. Worst of\
all\'97the publicity. The story has been told a million times over in all the\
papers in Moscow and Petersburg. Ah! yes, would you believe it, there\'92s a\
paragraph that I was \'91a dear friend\'92 of your brother\'92s \'97\'97, I can\'92t repeat\
the horrid word. Just fancy, just fancy!\'94\
\
\'93Impossible! Where was the paragraph? What did it say?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll show you directly. I got the paper and read it yesterday. Here, in\
the Petersburg paper _Gossip_. The paper began coming out this year. I am\
awfully fond of gossip, and I take it in, and now it pays me out\'97this is\
what gossip comes to! Here it is, here, this passage. Read it.\'94\
\
And she handed Alyosha a sheet of newspaper which had been under her\
pillow.\
\
It was not exactly that she was upset, she seemed overwhelmed and perhaps\
everything really was mixed up in a tangle in her head. The paragraph was\
very typical, and must have been a great shock to her, but, fortunately\
perhaps, she was unable to keep her mind fixed on any one subject at that\
moment, and so might race off in a minute to something else and quite\
forget the newspaper.\
\
Alyosha was well aware that the story of the terrible case had spread all\
over Russia. And, good heavens! what wild rumors about his brother, about\
the Karamazovs, and about himself he had read in the course of those two\
months, among other equally credible items! One paper had even stated that\
he had gone into a monastery and become a monk, in horror at his brother\'92s\
crime. Another contradicted this, and stated that he and his elder, Father\
Zossima, had broken into the monastery chest and \'93made tracks from the\
monastery.\'94 The present paragraph in the paper _Gossip_ was under the\
heading, \'93The Karamazov Case at Skotoprigonyevsk.\'94 (That, alas! was the\
name of our little town. I had hitherto kept it concealed.) It was brief,\
and Madame Hohlakov was not directly mentioned in it. No names appeared,\
in fact. It was merely stated that the criminal, whose approaching trial\
was making such a sensation\'97retired army captain, an idle swaggerer, and\
reactionary bully\'97was continually involved in amorous intrigues, and\
particularly popular with certain ladies \'93who were pining in solitude.\'94\
One such lady, a pining widow, who tried to seem young though she had a\
grown\uc0\u8208 up daughter, was so fascinated by him that only two hours before the\
crime she offered him three thousand roubles, on condition that he would\
elope with her to the gold mines. But the criminal, counting on escaping\
punishment, had preferred to murder his father to get the three thousand\
rather than go off to Siberia with the middle\uc0\u8208 aged charms of his pining\
lady. This playful paragraph finished, of course, with an outburst of\
generous indignation at the wickedness of parricide and at the lately\
abolished institution of serfdom. Reading it with curiosity, Alyosha\
folded up the paper and handed it back to Madame Hohlakov.\
\
\'93Well, that must be me,\'94 she hurried on again. \'93Of course I am meant.\
Scarcely more than an hour before, I suggested gold mines to him, and here\
they talk of \'91middle\uc0\u8208 aged charms\'92 as though that were my motive! He writes\
that out of spite! God Almighty forgive him for the middle\uc0\u8208 aged charms, as\
I forgive him! You know it\'92s\'97 Do you know who it is? It\'92s your friend\
Rakitin.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps,\'94 said Alyosha, \'93though I\'92ve heard nothing about it.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s he, it\'92s he! No \'91perhaps\'92 about it. You know I turned him out of the\
house.... You know all that story, don\'92t you?\'94\
\
\'93I know that you asked him not to visit you for the future, but why it\
was, I haven\'92t heard ... from you, at least.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, then you\'92ve heard it from him! He abuses me, I suppose, abuses me\
dreadfully?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, he does; but then he abuses every one. But why you\'92ve given him up I\
haven\'92t heard from him either. I meet him very seldom now, indeed. We are\
not friends.\'94\
\
\'93Well, then, I\'92ll tell you all about it. There\'92s no help for it, I\'92ll\
confess, for there is one point in which I was perhaps to blame. Only a\
little, little point, so little that perhaps it doesn\'92t count. You see, my\
dear boy\'94\'97Madame Hohlakov suddenly looked arch and a charming, though\
enigmatic, smile played about her lips\'97\'93you see, I suspect ... You must\
forgive me, Alyosha. I am like a mother to you.... No, no; quite the\
contrary. I speak to you now as though you were my father\'97mother\'92s quite\
out of place. Well, it\'92s as though I were confessing to Father Zossima,\
that\'92s just it. I called you a monk just now. Well, that poor young man,\
your friend, Rakitin (Mercy on us! I can\'92t be angry with him. I feel\
cross, but not very), that frivolous young man, would you believe it,\
seems to have taken it into his head to fall in love with me. I only\
noticed it later. At first\'97a month ago\'97he only began to come oftener to\
see me, almost every day; though, of course, we were acquainted before. I\
knew nothing about it ... and suddenly it dawned upon me, and I began to\
notice things with surprise. You know, two months ago, that modest,\
charming, excellent young man, Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin, who\'92s in the\
service here, began to be a regular visitor at the house. You met him here\
ever so many times yourself. And he is an excellent, earnest young man,\
isn\'92t he? He comes once every three days, not every day (though I should\
be glad to see him every day), and always so well dressed. Altogether, I\
love young people, Alyosha, talented, modest, like you, and he has almost\
the mind of a statesman, he talks so charmingly, and I shall certainly,\
certainly try and get promotion for him. He is a future diplomat. On that\
awful day he almost saved me from death by coming in the night. And your\
friend Rakitin comes in such boots, and always stretches them out on the\
carpet.... He began hinting at his feelings, in fact, and one day, as he\
was going, he squeezed my hand terribly hard. My foot began to swell\
directly after he pressed my hand like that. He had met Pyotr Ilyitch here\
before, and would you believe it, he is always gibing at him, growling at\
him, for some reason. I simply looked at the way they went on together and\
laughed inwardly. So I was sitting here alone\'97no, I was laid up then.\
Well, I was lying here alone and suddenly Rakitin comes in, and only\
fancy! brought me some verses of his own composition\'97a short poem, on my\
bad foot: that is, he described my foot in a poem. Wait a minute\'97how did\
it go?\
\
\
    A captivating little foot.\
\
\
It began somehow like that. I can never remember poetry. I\'92ve got it here.\
I\'92ll show it to you later. But it\'92s a charming thing\'97charming; and, you\
know, it\'92s not only about the foot, it had a good moral, too, a charming\
idea, only I\'92ve forgotten it; in fact, it was just the thing for an album.\
So, of course, I thanked him, and he was evidently flattered. I\'92d hardly\
had time to thank him when in comes Pyotr Ilyitch, and Rakitin suddenly\
looked as black as night. I could see that Pyotr Ilyitch was in the way,\
for Rakitin certainly wanted to say something after giving me the verses.\
I had a presentiment of it; but Pyotr Ilyitch came in. I showed Pyotr\
Ilyitch the verses and didn\'92t say who was the author. But I am convinced\
that he guessed, though he won\'92t own it to this day, and declares he had\
no idea. But he says that on purpose. Pyotr Ilyitch began to laugh at\
once, and fell to criticizing it. \'91Wretched doggerel,\'92 he said they were,\
\'91some divinity student must have written them,\'92 and with such vehemence,\
such vehemence! Then, instead of laughing, your friend flew into a rage.\
\'91Good gracious!\'92 I thought, \'91they\'92ll fly at each other.\'92 \'91It was I who\
wrote them,\'92 said he. \'91I wrote them as a joke,\'92 he said, \'91for I think it\
degrading to write verses.... But they are good poetry. They want to put a\
monument to your Pushkin for writing about women\'92s feet, while I wrote\
with a moral purpose, and you,\'92 said he, \'91are an advocate of serfdom.\
You\'92ve no humane ideas,\'92 said he. \'91You have no modern enlightened\
feelings, you are uninfluenced by progress, you are a mere official,\'92 he\
said, \'91and you take bribes.\'92 Then I began screaming and imploring them.\
And, you know, Pyotr Ilyitch is anything but a coward. He at once took up\
the most gentlemanly tone, looked at him sarcastically, listened, and\
apologized. \'91I\'92d no idea,\'92 said he. \'91I shouldn\'92t have said it, if I had\
known. I should have praised it. Poets are all so irritable,\'92 he said. In\
short, he laughed at him under cover of the most gentlemanly tone. He\
explained to me afterwards that it was all sarcastic. I thought he was in\
earnest. Only as I lay there, just as before you now, I thought, \'91Would\
it, or would it not, be the proper thing for me to turn Rakitin out for\
shouting so rudely at a visitor in my house?\'92 And, would you believe it, I\
lay here, shut my eyes, and wondered, would it be the proper thing or not.\
I kept worrying and worrying, and my heart began to beat, and I couldn\'92t\
make up my mind whether to make an outcry or not. One voice seemed to be\
telling me, \'91Speak,\'92 and the other \'91No, don\'92t speak.\'92 And no sooner had\
the second voice said that than I cried out, and fainted. Of course, there\
was a fuss. I got up suddenly and said to Rakitin, \'91It\'92s painful for me to\
say it, but I don\'92t wish to see you in my house again.\'92 So I turned him\
out. Ah! Alexey Fyodorovitch, I know myself I did wrong. I was putting it\
on. I wasn\'92t angry with him at all, really; but I suddenly fancied\'97that\
was what did it\'97that it would be such a fine scene.... And yet, believe\
me, it was quite natural, for I really shed tears and cried for several\
days afterwards, and then suddenly, one afternoon, I forgot all about it.\
So it\'92s a fortnight since he\'92s been here, and I kept wondering whether he\
would come again. I wondered even yesterday, then suddenly last night came\
this _Gossip_. I read it and gasped. Who could have written it? He must\
have written it. He went home, sat down, wrote it on the spot, sent it,\
and they put it in. It was a fortnight ago, you see. But, Alyosha, it\'92s\
awful how I keep talking and don\'92t say what I want to say. Ah! the words\
come of themselves!\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s very important for me to be in time to see my brother to\uc0\u8208 day,\'94\
Alyosha faltered.\
\
\'93To be sure, to be sure! You bring it all back to me. Listen, what is an\
aberration?\'94\
\
\'93What aberration?\'94 asked Alyosha, wondering.\
\
\'93In the legal sense. An aberration in which everything is pardonable.\
Whatever you do, you will be acquitted at once.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll tell you. This Katya ... Ah! she is a charming, charming creature,\
only I never can make out who it is she is in love with. She was with me\
some time ago and I couldn\'92t get anything out of her. Especially as she\
won\'92t talk to me except on the surface now. She is always talking about my\
health and nothing else, and she takes up such a tone with me, too. I\
simply said to myself, \'91Well, so be it. I don\'92t care\'92... Oh, yes. I was\
talking of aberration. This doctor has come. You know a doctor has come?\
Of course, you know it\'97the one who discovers madmen. You wrote for him.\
No, it wasn\'92t you, but Katya. It\'92s all Katya\'92s doing. Well, you see, a man\
may be sitting perfectly sane and suddenly have an aberration. He may be\
conscious and know what he is doing and yet be in a state of aberration.\
And there\'92s no doubt that Dmitri Fyodorovitch was suffering from\
aberration. They found out about aberration as soon as the law courts were\
reformed. It\'92s all the good effect of the reformed law courts. The doctor\
has been here and questioned me about that evening, about the gold mines.\
\'91How did he seem then?\'92 he asked me. He must have been in a state of\
aberration. He came in shouting, \'91Money, money, three thousand! Give me\
three thousand!\'92 and then went away and immediately did the murder. \'91I\
don\'92t want to murder him,\'92 he said, and he suddenly went and murdered him.\
That\'92s why they\'92ll acquit him, because he struggled against it and yet he\
murdered him.\'94\
\
\'93But he didn\'92t murder him,\'94 Alyosha interrupted rather sharply. He felt\
more and more sick with anxiety and impatience.\
\
\'93Yes, I know it was that old man Grigory murdered him.\'94\
\
\'93Grigory?\'94 cried Alyosha.\
\
\'93Yes, yes; it was Grigory. He lay as Dmitri Fyodorovitch struck him down,\
and then got up, saw the door open, went in and killed Fyodor Pavlovitch.\'94\
\
\'93But why, why?\'94\
\
\'93Suffering from aberration. When he recovered from the blow Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch gave him on the head, he was suffering from aberration; he\
went and committed the murder. As for his saying he didn\'92t, he very likely\
doesn\'92t remember. Only, you know, it\'92ll be better, ever so much better, if\
Dmitri Fyodorovitch murdered him. And that\'92s how it must have been, though\
I say it was Grigory. It certainly was Dmitri Fyodorovitch, and that\'92s\
better, ever so much better! Oh! not better that a son should have killed\
his father, I don\'92t defend that. Children ought to honor their parents,\
and yet it would be better if it were he, as you\'92d have nothing to cry\
over then, for he did it when he was unconscious or rather when he was\
conscious, but did not know what he was doing. Let them acquit him\'97that\'92s\
so humane, and would show what a blessing reformed law courts are. I knew\
nothing about it, but they say they have been so a long time. And when I\
heard it yesterday, I was so struck by it that I wanted to send for you at\
once. And if he is acquitted, make him come straight from the law courts\
to dinner with me, and I\'92ll have a party of friends, and we\'92ll drink to\
the reformed law courts. I don\'92t believe he\'92d be dangerous; besides, I\'92ll\
invite a great many friends, so that he could always be led out if he did\
anything. And then he might be made a justice of the peace or something in\
another town, for those who have been in trouble themselves make the best\
judges. And, besides, who isn\'92t suffering from aberration nowadays?\'97you,\
I, all of us are in a state of aberration, and there are ever so many\
examples of it: a man sits singing a song, suddenly something annoys him,\
he takes a pistol and shoots the first person he comes across, and no one\
blames him for it. I read that lately, and all the doctors confirm it. The\
doctors are always confirming; they confirm anything. Why, my Lise is in a\
state of aberration. She made me cry again yesterday, and the day before,\
too, and to\uc0\u8208 day I suddenly realized that it\'92s all due to aberration. Oh,\
Lise grieves me so! I believe she\'92s quite mad. Why did she send for you?\
Did she send for you or did you come of yourself?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, she sent for me, and I am just going to her.\'94 Alyosha got up\
resolutely.\
\
\'93Oh, my dear, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, perhaps that\'92s what\'92s most\
important,\'94 Madame Hohlakov cried, suddenly bursting into tears. \'93God\
knows I trust Lise to you with all my heart, and it\'92s no matter her\
sending for you on the sly, without telling her mother. But forgive me, I\
can\'92t trust my daughter so easily to your brother Ivan Fyodorovitch,\
though I still consider him the most chivalrous young man. But only fancy,\
he\'92s been to see Lise and I knew nothing about it!\'94\
\
\'93How? What? When?\'94 Alyosha was exceedingly surprised. He had not sat down\
again and listened standing.\
\
\'93I will tell you; that\'92s perhaps why I asked you to come, for I don\'92t know\
now why I did ask you to come. Well, Ivan Fyodorovitch has been to see me\
twice, since he came back from Moscow. First time he came as a friend to\
call on me, and the second time Katya was here and he came because he\
heard she was here. I didn\'92t, of course, expect him to come often, knowing\
what a lot he has to do as it is, _vous comprenez, cette affaire et la\
mort terrible de votre papa_. But I suddenly heard he\'92d been here again,\
not to see me but to see Lise. That\'92s six days ago now. He came, stayed\
five minutes, and went away. And I didn\'92t hear of it till three days\
afterwards, from Glafira, so it was a great shock to me. I sent for Lise\
directly. She laughed. \'91He thought you were asleep,\'92 she said, \'91and came\
in to me to ask after your health.\'92 Of course, that\'92s how it happened. But\
Lise, Lise, mercy on us, how she distresses me! Would you believe it, one\
night, four days ago, just after you saw her last time, and had gone away,\
she suddenly had a fit, screaming, shrieking, hysterics! Why is it I never\
have hysterics? Then, next day another fit, and the same thing on the\
third, and yesterday too, and then yesterday that aberration. She suddenly\
screamed out, \'91I hate Ivan Fyodorovitch. I insist on your never letting\
him come to the house again.\'92 I was struck dumb at these amazing words,\
and answered, \'91On what grounds could I refuse to see such an excellent\
young man, a young man of such learning too, and so unfortunate?\'92\'97for all\
this business is a misfortune, isn\'92t it? She suddenly burst out laughing\
at my words, and so rudely, you know. Well, I was pleased; I thought I had\
amused her and the fits would pass off, especially as I wanted to refuse\
to see Ivan Fyodorovitch anyway on account of his strange visits without\
my knowledge, and meant to ask him for an explanation. But early this\
morning Lise waked up and flew into a passion with Yulia and, would you\
believe it, slapped her in the face. That\'92s monstrous; I am always polite\
to my servants. And an hour later she was hugging Yulia\'92s feet and kissing\
them. She sent a message to me that she wasn\'92t coming to me at all, and\
would never come and see me again, and when I dragged myself down to her,\
she rushed to kiss me, crying, and as she kissed me, she pushed me out of\
the room without saying a word, so I couldn\'92t find out what was the\
matter. Now, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, I rest all my hopes on you, and, of\
course, my whole life is in your hands. I simply beg you to go to Lise and\
find out everything from her, as you alone can, and come back and tell\
me\'97me, her mother, for you understand it will be the death of me, simply\
the death of me, if this goes on, or else I shall run away. I can stand no\
more. I have patience; but I may lose patience, and then ... then\
something awful will happen. Ah, dear me! At last, Pyotr Ilyitch!\'94 cried\
Madame Hohlakov, beaming all over as she saw Perhotin enter the room. \'93You\
are late, you are late! Well, sit down, speak, put us out of suspense.\
What does the counsel say. Where are you off to, Alexey Fyodorovitch?\'94\
\
\'93To Lise.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, yes. You won\'92t forget, you won\'92t forget what I asked you? It\'92s a\
question of life and death!\'94\
\
\'93Of course, I won\'92t forget, if I can ... but I am so late,\'94 muttered\
Alyosha, beating a hasty retreat.\
\
\'93No, be sure, be sure to come in; don\'92t say \'91If you can.\'92 I shall die if\
you don\'92t,\'94 Madame Hohlakov called after him, but Alyosha had already left\
the room.\
\
\
\
Chapter III. A Little Demon\
\
\
Going in to Lise, he found her half reclining in the invalid\uc0\u8208 chair, in\
which she had been wheeled when she was unable to walk. She did not move\
to meet him, but her sharp, keen eyes were simply riveted on his face.\
There was a feverish look in her eyes, her face was pale and yellow.\
Alyosha was amazed at the change that had taken place in her in three\
days. She was positively thinner. She did not hold out her hand to him. He\
touched the thin, long fingers which lay motionless on her dress, then he\
sat down facing her, without a word.\
\
\'93I know you are in a hurry to get to the prison,\'94 Lise said curtly, \'93and\
mamma\'92s kept you there for hours; she\'92s just been telling you about me and\
Yulia.\'94\
\
\'93How do you know?\'94 asked Alyosha.\
\
\'93I\'92ve been listening. Why do you stare at me? I want to listen and I do\
listen, there\'92s no harm in that. I don\'92t apologize.\'94\
\
\'93You are upset about something?\'94\
\
\'93On the contrary, I am very happy. I\'92ve only just been reflecting for the\
thirtieth time what a good thing it is I refused you and shall not be your\
wife. You are not fit to be a husband. If I were to marry you and give you\
a note to take to the man I loved after you, you\'92d take it and be sure to\
give it to him and bring an answer back, too. If you were forty, you would\
still go on taking my love\uc0\u8208 letters for me.\'94\
\
She suddenly laughed.\
\
\'93There is something spiteful and yet open\uc0\u8208 hearted about you,\'94 Alyosha\
smiled to her.\
\
\'93The open\uc0\u8208 heartedness consists in my not being ashamed of myself with you.\
What\'92s more, I don\'92t want to feel ashamed with you, just with you.\
Alyosha, why is it I don\'92t respect you? I am very fond of you, but I don\'92t\
respect you. If I respected you, I shouldn\'92t talk to you without shame,\
should I?\'94\
\
\'93No.\'94\
\
\'93But do you believe that I am not ashamed with you?\'94\
\
\'93No, I don\'92t believe it.\'94\
\
Lise laughed nervously again; she spoke rapidly.\
\
\'93I sent your brother, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, some sweets in prison. Alyosha,\
you know, you are quite pretty! I shall love you awfully for having so\
quickly allowed me not to love you.\'94\
\
\'93Why did you send for me to\uc0\u8208 day, Lise?\'94\
\
\'93I wanted to tell you of a longing I have. I should like some one to\
torture me, marry me and then torture me, deceive me and go away. I don\'92t\
want to be happy.\'94\
\
\'93You are in love with disorder?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I want disorder. I keep wanting to set fire to the house. I keep\
imagining how I\'92ll creep up and set fire to the house on the sly; it must\
be on the sly. They\'92ll try to put it out, but it\'92ll go on burning. And I\
shall know and say nothing. Ah, what silliness! And how bored I am!\'94\
\
She waved her hand with a look of repulsion.\
\
\'93It\'92s your luxurious life,\'94 said Alyosha, softly.\
\
\'93Is it better, then, to be poor?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, it is better.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s what your monk taught you. That\'92s not true. Let me be rich and all\
the rest poor, I\'92ll eat sweets and drink cream and not give any to any one\
else. Ach, don\'92t speak, don\'92t say anything,\'94 she shook her hand at him,\
though Alyosha had not opened his mouth. \'93You\'92ve told me all that before,\
I know it all by heart. It bores me. If I am ever poor, I shall murder\
somebody, and even if I am rich, I may murder some one, perhaps\'97why do\
nothing! But do you know, I should like to reap, cut the rye? I\'92ll marry\
you, and you shall become a peasant, a real peasant; we\'92ll keep a colt,\
shall we? Do you know Kalganov?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93He is always wandering about, dreaming. He says, \'91Why live in real life?\
It\'92s better to dream. One can dream the most delightful things, but real\
life is a bore.\'92 But he\'92ll be married soon for all that; he\'92s been making\
love to me already. Can you spin tops?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93Well, he\'92s just like a top: he wants to be wound up and set spinning and\
then to be lashed, lashed, lashed with a whip. If I marry him, I\'92ll keep\
him spinning all his life. You are not ashamed to be with me?\'94\
\
\'93No.\'94\
\
\'93You are awfully cross, because I don\'92t talk about holy things. I don\'92t\
want to be holy. What will they do to one in the next world for the\
greatest sin? You must know all about that.\'94\
\
\'93God will censure you.\'94 Alyosha was watching her steadily.\
\
\'93That\'92s just what I should like. I would go up and they would censure me,\
and I would burst out laughing in their faces. I should dreadfully like to\
set fire to the house, Alyosha, to our house; you still don\'92t believe me?\'94\
\
\'93Why? There are children of twelve years old, who have a longing to set\
fire to something and they do set things on fire, too. It\'92s a sort of\
disease.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s not true, that\'92s not true; there may be children, but that\'92s not\
what I mean.\'94\
\
\'93You take evil for good; it\'92s a passing crisis, it\'92s the result of your\
illness, perhaps.\'94\
\
\'93You do despise me, though! It\'92s simply that I don\'92t want to do good, I\
want to do evil, and it has nothing to do with illness.\'94\
\
\'93Why do evil?\'94\
\
\'93So that everything might be destroyed. Ah, how nice it would be if\
everything were destroyed! You know, Alyosha, I sometimes think of doing a\
fearful lot of harm and everything bad, and I should do it for a long\
while on the sly and suddenly every one would find it out. Every one will\
stand round and point their fingers at me and I would look at them all.\
That would be awfully nice. Why would it be so nice, Alyosha?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know. It\'92s a craving to destroy something good or, as you say, to\
set fire to something. It happens sometimes.\'94\
\
\'93I not only say it, I shall do it.\'94\
\
\'93I believe you.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, how I love you for saying you believe me. And you are not lying one\
little bit. But perhaps you think that I am saying all this on purpose to\
annoy you?\'94\
\
\'93No, I don\'92t think that ... though perhaps there is a little desire to do\
that in it, too.\'94\
\
\'93There is a little. I never can tell lies to you,\'94 she declared, with a\
strange fire in her eyes.\
\
What struck Alyosha above everything was her earnestness. There was not a\
trace of humor or jesting in her face now, though, in old days, fun and\
gayety never deserted her even at her most \'93earnest\'94 moments.\
\
\'93There are moments when people love crime,\'94 said Alyosha thoughtfully.\
\
\'93Yes, yes! You have uttered my thought; they love crime, every one loves\
crime, they love it always, not at some \'91moments.\'92 You know, it\'92s as\
though people have made an agreement to lie about it and have lied about\
it ever since. They all declare that they hate evil, but secretly they all\
love it.\'94\
\
\'93And are you still reading nasty books?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I am. Mamma reads them and hides them under her pillow and I steal\
them.\'94\
\
\'93Aren\'92t you ashamed to destroy yourself?\'94\
\
\'93I want to destroy myself. There\'92s a boy here, who lay down between the\
railway lines when the train was passing. Lucky fellow! Listen, your\
brother is being tried now for murdering his father and every one loves\
his having killed his father.\'94\
\
\'93Loves his having killed his father?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, loves it; every one loves it! Everybody says it\'92s so awful, but\
secretly they simply love it. I for one love it.\'94\
\
\'93There is some truth in what you say about every one,\'94 said Alyosha\
softly.\
\
\'93Oh, what ideas you have!\'94 Lise shrieked in delight. \'93And you a monk, too!\
You wouldn\'92t believe how I respect you, Alyosha, for never telling lies.\
Oh, I must tell you a funny dream of mine. I sometimes dream of devils.\
It\'92s night; I am in my room with a candle and suddenly there are devils\
all over the place, in all the corners, under the table, and they open the\
doors; there\'92s a crowd of them behind the doors and they want to come and\
seize me. And they are just coming, just seizing me. But I suddenly cross\
myself and they all draw back, though they don\'92t go away altogether, they\
stand at the doors and in the corners, waiting. And suddenly I have a\
frightful longing to revile God aloud, and so I begin, and then they come\
crowding back to me, delighted, and seize me again and I cross myself\
again and they all draw back. It\'92s awful fun. it takes one\'92s breath away.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve had the same dream, too,\'94 said Alyosha suddenly.\
\
\'93Really?\'94 cried Lise, surprised. \'93I say, Alyosha, don\'92t laugh, that\'92s\
awfully important. Could two different people have the same dream?\'94\
\
\'93It seems they can.\'94\
\
\'93Alyosha, I tell you, it\'92s awfully important,\'94 Lise went on, with really\
excessive amazement. \'93It\'92s not the dream that\'92s important, but your having\
the same dream as me. You never lie to me, don\'92t lie now: is it true? You\
are not laughing?\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s true.\'94\
\
Lise seemed extraordinarily impressed and for half a minute she was\
silent.\
\
\'93Alyosha, come and see me, come and see me more often,\'94 she said suddenly,\
in a supplicating voice.\
\
\'93I\'92ll always come to see you, all my life,\'94 answered Alyosha firmly.\
\
\'93You are the only person I can talk to, you know,\'94 Lise began again. \'93I\
talk to no one but myself and you. Only you in the whole world. And to you\
more readily than to myself. And I am not a bit ashamed with you, not a\
bit. Alyosha, why am I not ashamed with you, not a bit? Alyosha, is it\
true that at Easter the Jews steal a child and kill it?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know.\'94\
\
\'93There\'92s a book here in which I read about the trial of a Jew, who took a\
child of four years old and cut off the fingers from both hands, and then\
crucified him on the wall, hammered nails into him and crucified him, and\
afterwards, when he was tried, he said that the child died soon, within\
four hours. That was \'91soon\'92! He said the child moaned, kept on moaning and\
he stood admiring it. That\'92s nice!\'94\
\
\'93Nice?\'94\
\
\'93Nice; I sometimes imagine that it was I who crucified him. He would hang\
there moaning and I would sit opposite him eating pineapple _compote_. I\
am awfully fond of pineapple _compote_. Do you like it?\'94\
\
Alyosha looked at her in silence. Her pale, sallow face was suddenly\
contorted, her eyes burned.\
\
\'93You know, when I read about that Jew I shook with sobs all night. I kept\
fancying how the little thing cried and moaned (a child of four years old\
understands, you know), and all the while the thought of pineapple\
_compote_ haunted me. In the morning I wrote a letter to a certain person,\
begging him _particularly_ to come and see me. He came and I suddenly told\
him all about the child and the pineapple _compote_. _All_ about it,\
_all_, and said that it was nice. He laughed and said it really was nice.\
Then he got up and went away. He was only here five minutes. Did he\
despise me? Did he despise me? Tell me, tell me, Alyosha, did he despise\
me or not?\'94 She sat up on the couch, with flashing eyes.\
\
\'93Tell me,\'94 Alyosha asked anxiously, \'93did you send for that person?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I did.\'94\
\
\'93Did you send him a letter?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93Simply to ask about that, about that child?\'94\
\
\'93No, not about that at all. But when he came, I asked him about that at\
once. He answered, laughed, got up and went away.\'94\
\
\'93That person behaved honorably,\'94 Alyosha murmured.\
\
\'93And did he despise me? Did he laugh at me?\'94\
\
\'93No, for perhaps he believes in the pineapple _compote_ himself. He is\
very ill now, too, Lise.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, he does believe in it,\'94 said Lise, with flashing eyes.\
\
\'93He doesn\'92t despise any one,\'94 Alyosha went on. \'93Only he does not believe\
any one. If he doesn\'92t believe in people, of course, he does despise\
them.\'94\
\
\'93Then he despises me, me?\'94\
\
\'93You, too.\'94\
\
\'93Good,\'94 Lise seemed to grind her teeth. \'93When he went out laughing, I felt\
that it was nice to be despised. The child with fingers cut off is nice,\
and to be despised is nice....\'94\
\
And she laughed in Alyosha\'92s face, a feverish malicious laugh.\
\
\'93Do you know, Alyosha, do you know, I should like\'97Alyosha, save me!\'94 She\
suddenly jumped from the couch, rushed to him and seized him with both\
hands. \'93Save me!\'94 she almost groaned. \'93Is there any one in the world I\
could tell what I\'92ve told you? I\'92ve told you the truth, the truth. I shall\
kill myself, because I loathe everything! I don\'92t want to live, because I\
loathe everything! I loathe everything, everything. Alyosha, why don\'92t you\
love me in the least?\'94 she finished in a frenzy.\
\
\'93But I do love you!\'94 answered Alyosha warmly.\
\
\'93And will you weep over me, will you?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93Not because I won\'92t be your wife, but simply weep for me?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93Thank you! It\'92s only your tears I want. Every one else may punish me and\
trample me under foot, every one, every one, not excepting _any one_. For\
I don\'92t love any one. Do you hear, not any one! On the contrary, I hate\
him! Go, Alyosha; it\'92s time you went to your brother\'94; she tore herself\
away from him suddenly.\
\
\'93How can I leave you like this?\'94 said Alyosha, almost in alarm.\
\
\'93Go to your brother, the prison will be shut; go, here\'92s your hat. Give my\
love to Mitya, go, go!\'94\
\
And she almost forcibly pushed Alyosha out of the door. He looked at her\
with pained surprise, when he was suddenly aware of a letter in his right\
hand, a tiny letter folded up tight and sealed. He glanced at it and\
instantly read the address, \'93To Ivan Fyodorovitch Karamazov.\'94 He looked\
quickly at Lise. Her face had become almost menacing.\
\
\'93Give it to him, you must give it to him!\'94 she ordered him, trembling and\
beside herself. \'93To\uc0\u8208 day, at once, or I\'92ll poison myself! That\'92s why I sent\
for you.\'94\
\
And she slammed the door quickly. The bolt clicked. Alyosha put the note\
in his pocket and went straight downstairs, without going back to Madame\
Hohlakov; forgetting her, in fact. As soon as Alyosha had gone, Lise\
unbolted the door, opened it a little, put her finger in the crack and\
slammed the door with all her might, pinching her finger. Ten seconds\
after, releasing her finger, she walked softly, slowly to her chair, sat\
up straight in it and looked intently at her blackened finger and at the\
blood that oozed from under the nail. Her lips were quivering and she kept\
whispering rapidly to herself:\
\
\'93I am a wretch, wretch, wretch, wretch!\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter IV. A Hymn And A Secret\
\
\
It was quite late (days are short in November) when Alyosha rang at the\
prison gate. It was beginning to get dusk. But Alyosha knew that he would\
be admitted without difficulty. Things were managed in our little town, as\
everywhere else. At first, of course, on the conclusion of the preliminary\
inquiry, relations and a few other persons could only obtain interviews\
with Mitya by going through certain inevitable formalities. But later,\
though the formalities were not relaxed, exceptions were made for some, at\
least, of Mitya\'92s visitors. So much so, that sometimes the interviews with\
the prisoner in the room set aside for the purpose were practically\
_t\'eate\uc0\u8208 \'e0\u8208 t\'eate_.\
\
These exceptions, however, were few in number; only Grushenka, Alyosha and\
Rakitin were treated like this. But the captain of the police, Mihail\
Mihailovitch, was very favorably disposed to Grushenka. His abuse of her\
at Mokroe weighed on the old man\'92s conscience, and when he learned the\
whole story, he completely changed his view of her. And strange to say,\
though he was firmly persuaded of his guilt, yet after Mitya was once in\
prison, the old man came to take a more and more lenient view of him. \'93He\
was a man of good heart, perhaps,\'94 he thought, \'93who had come to grief from\
drinking and dissipation.\'94 His first horror had been succeeded by pity. As\
for Alyosha, the police captain was very fond of him and had known him for\
a long time. Rakitin, who had of late taken to coming very often to see\
the prisoner, was one of the most intimate acquaintances of the \'93police\
captain\'92s young ladies,\'94 as he called them, and was always hanging about\
their house. He gave lessons in the house of the prison superintendent,\
too, who, though scrupulous in the performance of his duties, was a kind\uc0\u8208 \
hearted old man. Alyosha, again, had an intimate acquaintance of long\
standing with the superintendent, who was fond of talking to him,\
generally on sacred subjects. He respected Ivan Fyodorovitch, and stood in\
awe of his opinion, though he was a great philosopher himself; \'93self\uc0\u8208 \
taught,\'94 of course. But Alyosha had an irresistible attraction for him.\
During the last year the old man had taken to studying the Apocryphal\
Gospels, and constantly talked over his impressions with his young friend.\
He used to come and see him in the monastery and discussed for hours\
together with him and with the monks. So even if Alyosha were late at the\
prison, he had only to go to the superintendent and everything was made\
easy. Besides, every one in the prison, down to the humblest warder, had\
grown used to Alyosha. The sentry, of course, did not trouble him so long\
as the authorities were satisfied.\
\
When Mitya was summoned from his cell, he always went downstairs, to the\
place set aside for interviews. As Alyosha entered the room he came upon\
Rakitin, who was just taking leave of Mitya. They were both talking\
loudly. Mitya was laughing heartily as he saw him out, while Rakitin\
seemed grumbling. Rakitin did not like meeting Alyosha, especially of\
late. He scarcely spoke to him, and bowed to him stiffly. Seeing Alyosha\
enter now, he frowned and looked away, as though he were entirely absorbed\
in buttoning his big, warm, fur\uc0\u8208 trimmed overcoat. Then he began looking at\
once for his umbrella.\
\
\'93I must mind not to forget my belongings,\'94 he muttered, simply to say\
something.\
\
\'93Mind you don\'92t forget other people\'92s belongings,\'94 said Mitya, as a joke,\
and laughed at once at his own wit. Rakitin fired up instantly.\
\
\'93You\'92d better give that advice to your own family, who\'92ve always been a\
slave\uc0\u8208 driving lot, and not to Rakitin,\'94 he cried, suddenly trembling with\
anger.\
\
\'93What\'92s the matter? I was joking,\'94 cried Mitya. \'93Damn it all! They are all\
like that,\'94 he turned to Alyosha, nodding towards Rakitin\'92s hurriedly\
retreating figure. \'93He was sitting here, laughing and cheerful, and all at\
once he boils up like that. He didn\'92t even nod to you. Have you broken\
with him completely? Why are you so late? I\'92ve not been simply waiting,\
but thirsting for you the whole morning. But never mind. We\'92ll make up for\
it now.\'94\
\
\'93Why does he come here so often? Surely you are not such great friends?\'94\
asked Alyosha. He, too, nodded at the door through which Rakitin had\
disappeared.\
\
\'93Great friends with Rakitin? No, not as much as that. Is it likely\'97a pig\
like that? He considers I am ... a blackguard. They can\'92t understand a\
joke either, that\'92s the worst of such people. They never understand a\
joke, and their souls are dry, dry and flat; they remind me of prison\
walls when I was first brought here. But he is a clever fellow, very\
clever. Well, Alexey, it\'92s all over with me now.\'94\
\
He sat down on the bench and made Alyosha sit down beside him.\
\
\'93Yes, the trial\'92s to\uc0\u8208 morrow. Are you so hopeless, brother?\'94 Alyosha said,\
with an apprehensive feeling.\
\
\'93What are you talking about?\'94 said Mitya, looking at him rather\
uncertainly. \'93Oh, you mean the trial! Damn it all! Till now we\'92ve been\
talking of things that don\'92t matter, about this trial, but I haven\'92t said\
a word to you about the chief thing. Yes, the trial is to\uc0\u8208 morrow; but it\
wasn\'92t the trial I meant, when I said it was all over with me. Why do you\
look at me so critically?\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean, Mitya?\'94\
\
\'93Ideas, ideas, that\'92s all! Ethics! What is ethics?\'94\
\
\'93Ethics?\'94 asked Alyosha, wondering.\
\
\'93Yes; is it a science?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, there is such a science ... but ... I confess I can\'92t explain to you\
what sort of science it is.\'94\
\
\'93Rakitin knows. Rakitin knows a lot, damn him! He\'92s not going to be a\
monk. He means to go to Petersburg. There he\'92ll go in for criticism of an\
elevating tendency. Who knows, he may be of use and make his own career,\
too. Ough! they are first\uc0\u8208 rate, these people, at making a career! Damn\
ethics, I am done for, Alexey, I am, you man of God! I love you more than\
any one. It makes my heart yearn to look at you. Who was Karl Bernard?\'94\
\
\'93Karl Bernard?\'94 Alyosha was surprised again.\
\
\'93No, not Karl. Stay, I made a mistake. Claude Bernard. What was he?\
Chemist or what?\'94\
\
\'93He must be a savant,\'94 answered Alyosha; \'93but I confess I can\'92t tell you\
much about him, either. I\'92ve heard of him as a savant, but what sort I\
don\'92t know.\'94\
\
\'93Well, damn him, then! I don\'92t know either,\'94 swore Mitya. \'93A scoundrel of\
some sort, most likely. They are all scoundrels. And Rakitin will make his\
way. Rakitin will get on anywhere; he is another Bernard. Ugh, these\
Bernards! They are all over the place.\'94\
\
\'93But what is the matter?\'94 Alyosha asked insistently.\
\
\'93He wants to write an article about me, about my case, and so begin his\
literary career. That\'92s what he comes for; he said so himself. He wants to\
prove some theory. He wants to say \'91he couldn\'92t help murdering his father,\
he was corrupted by his environment,\'92 and so on. He explained it all to\
me. He is going to put in a tinge of Socialism, he says. But there, damn\
the fellow, he can put in a tinge if he likes, I don\'92t care. He can\'92t bear\
Ivan, he hates him. He\'92s not fond of you, either. But I don\'92t turn him\
out, for he is a clever fellow. Awfully conceited, though. I said to him\
just now, \'91The Karamazovs are not blackguards, but philosophers; for all\
true Russians are philosophers, and though you\'92ve studied, you are not a\
philosopher\'97you are a low fellow.\'92 He laughed, so maliciously. And I said\
to him, \'91_De ideabus non est disputandum_.\'92 Isn\'92t that rather good? I can\
set up for being a classic, you see!\'94 Mitya laughed suddenly.\
\
\'93Why is it all over with you? You said so just now,\'94 Alyosha interposed.\
\
\'93Why is it all over with me? H\'92m!... The fact of it is ... if you take it\
as a whole, I am sorry to lose God\'97that\'92s why it is.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean by \'91sorry to lose God\'92?\'94\
\
\'93Imagine: inside, in the nerves, in the head\'97that is, these nerves are\
there in the brain ... (damn them!) there are sort of little tails, the\
little tails of those nerves, and as soon as they begin quivering ... that\
is, you see, I look at something with my eyes and then they begin\
quivering, those little tails ... and when they quiver, then an image\
appears ... it doesn\'92t appear at once, but an instant, a second, passes\
... and then something like a moment appears; that is, not a moment\'97devil\
take the moment!\'97but an image; that is, an object, or an action, damn it!\
That\'92s why I see and then think, because of those tails, not at all\
because I\'92ve got a soul, and that I am some sort of image and likeness.\
All that is nonsense! Rakitin explained it all to me yesterday, brother,\
and it simply bowled me over. It\'92s magnificent, Alyosha, this science! A\
new man\'92s arising\'97that I understand.... And yet I am sorry to lose God!\'94\
\
\'93Well, that\'92s a good thing, anyway,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93That I am sorry to lose God? It\'92s chemistry, brother, chemistry! There\'92s\
no help for it, your reverence, you must make way for chemistry. And\
Rakitin does dislike God. Ough! doesn\'92t he dislike Him! That\'92s the sore\
point with all of them. But they conceal it. They tell lies. They pretend.\
\'91Will you preach this in your reviews?\'92 I asked him. \'91Oh, well, if I did\
it openly, they won\'92t let it through,\'92 he said. He laughed. \'91But what will\
become of men then?\'92 I asked him, \'91without God and immortal life? All\
things are lawful then, they can do what they like?\'92 \'91Didn\'92t you know?\'92 he\
said laughing, \'91a clever man can do what he likes,\'92 he said. \'91A clever man\
knows his way about, but you\'92ve put your foot in it, committing a murder,\
and now you are rotting in prison.\'92 He says that to my face! A regular\
pig! I used to kick such people out, but now I listen to them. He talks a\
lot of sense, too. Writes well. He began reading me an article last week.\
I copied out three lines of it. Wait a minute. Here it is.\'94\
\
Mitya hurriedly pulled out a piece of paper from his pocket and read:\
\
\'93 \'91In order to determine this question, it is above all essential to put\
one\'92s personality in contradiction to one\'92s reality.\'92 Do you understand\
that?\'94\
\
\'93No, I don\'92t,\'94 said Alyosha. He looked at Mitya and listened to him with\
curiosity.\
\
\'93I don\'92t understand either. It\'92s dark and obscure, but intellectual.\
\'91Every one writes like that now,\'92 he says, \'91it\'92s the effect of their\
environment.\'92 They are afraid of the environment. He writes poetry, too,\
the rascal. He\'92s written in honor of Madame Hohlakov\'92s foot. Ha ha ha!\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve heard about it,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93Have you? And have you heard the poem?\'94\
\
\'93No.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve got it. Here it is. I\'92ll read it to you. You don\'92t know\'97I haven\'92t\
told you\'97there\'92s quite a story about it. He\'92s a rascal! Three weeks ago he\
began to tease me. \'91You\'92ve got yourself into a mess, like a fool, for the\
sake of three thousand, but I\'92m going to collar a hundred and fifty\
thousand. I am going to marry a widow and buy a house in Petersburg.\'92 And\
he told me he was courting Madame Hohlakov. She hadn\'92t much brains in her\
youth, and now at forty she has lost what she had. \'91But she\'92s awfully\
sentimental,\'92 he says; \'91that\'92s how I shall get hold of her. When I marry\
her, I shall take her to Petersburg and there I shall start a newspaper.\'92\
And his mouth was simply watering, the beast, not for the widow, but for\
the hundred and fifty thousand. And he made me believe it. He came to see\
me every day. \'91She is coming round,\'92 he declared. He was beaming with\
delight. And then, all of a sudden, he was turned out of the house.\
Perhotin\'92s carrying everything before him, bravo! I could kiss the silly\
old noodle for turning him out of the house. And he had written this\
doggerel. \'91It\'92s the first time I\'92ve soiled my hands with writing poetry,\'92\
he said. \'91It\'92s to win her heart, so it\'92s in a good cause. When I get hold\
of the silly woman\'92s fortune, I can be of great social utility.\'92 They have\
this social justification for every nasty thing they do! \'91Anyway it\'92s\
better than your Pushkin\'92s poetry,\'92 he said, \'91for I\'92ve managed to advocate\
enlightenment even in that.\'92 I understand what he means about Pushkin, I\
quite see that, if he really was a man of talent and only wrote about\
women\'92s feet. But wasn\'92t Rakitin stuck up about his doggerel! The vanity\
of these fellows! \'91On the convalescence of the swollen foot of the object\
of my affections\'92\'97he thought of that for a title. He\'92s a waggish fellow.\
\
\
    A captivating little foot,\
    Though swollen and red and tender!\
    The doctors come and plasters put,\
    But still they cannot mend her.\
\
    Yet, \'92tis not for her foot I dread\'97\
    A theme for Pushkin\'92s muse more fit\'97\
    It\'92s not her foot, it is her head:\
    I tremble for her loss of wit!\
\
    For as her foot swells, strange to say,\
    Her intellect is on the wane\'97\
    Oh, for some remedy I pray\
    That may restore both foot and brain!\
\
\
He is a pig, a regular pig, but he\'92s very arch, the rascal! And he really\
has put in a progressive idea. And wasn\'92t he angry when she kicked him\
out! He was gnashing his teeth!\'94\
\
\'93He\'92s taken his revenge already,\'94 said Alyosha. \'93He\'92s written a paragraph\
about Madame Hohlakov.\'94\
\
And Alyosha told him briefly about the paragraph in _Gossip_.\
\
\'93That\'92s his doing, that\'92s his doing!\'94 Mitya assented, frowning. \'93That\'92s\
him! These paragraphs ... I know ... the insulting things that have been\
written about Grushenka, for instance.... And about Katya, too.... H\'92m!\'94\
\
He walked across the room with a harassed air.\
\
\'93Brother, I cannot stay long,\'94 Alyosha said, after a pause. \'93To\uc0\u8208 morrow\
will be a great and awful day for you, the judgment of God will be\
accomplished ... I am amazed at you, you walk about here, talking of I\
don\'92t know what ...\'94\
\
\'93No, don\'92t be amazed at me,\'94 Mitya broke in warmly. \'93Am I to talk of that\
stinking dog? Of the murderer? We\'92ve talked enough of him. I don\'92t want to\
say more of the stinking son of Stinking Lizaveta! God will kill him, you\
will see. Hush!\'94\
\
He went up to Alyosha excitedly and kissed him. His eyes glowed.\
\
\'93Rakitin wouldn\'92t understand it,\'94 he began in a sort of exaltation; \'93but\
you, you\'92ll understand it all. That\'92s why I was thirsting for you. You\
see, there\'92s so much I\'92ve been wanting to tell you for ever so long, here,\
within these peeling walls, but I haven\'92t said a word about what matters\
most; the moment never seems to have come. Now I can wait no longer. I\
must pour out my heart to you. Brother, these last two months I\'92ve found\
in myself a new man. A new man has risen up in me. He was hidden in me,\
but would never have come to the surface, if it hadn\'92t been for this blow\
from heaven. I am afraid! And what do I care if I spend twenty years in\
the mines, breaking ore with a hammer? I am not a bit afraid of that\'97it\'92s\
something else I am afraid of now: that that new man may leave me. Even\
there, in the mines, under\uc0\u8208 ground, I may find a human heart in another\
convict and murderer by my side, and I may make friends with him, for even\
there one may live and love and suffer. One may thaw and revive a frozen\
heart in that convict, one may wait upon him for years, and at last bring\
up from the dark depths a lofty soul, a feeling, suffering creature; one\
may bring forth an angel, create a hero! There are so many of them,\
hundreds of them, and we are all to blame for them. Why was it I dreamed\
of that \'91babe\'92 at such a moment? \'91Why is the babe so poor?\'92 That was a\
sign to me at that moment. It\'92s for the babe I\'92m going. Because we are all\
responsible for all. For all the \'91babes,\'92 for there are big children as\
well as little children. All are \'91babes.\'92 I go for all, because some one\
must go for all. I didn\'92t kill father, but I\'92ve got to go. I accept it.\
It\'92s all come to me here, here, within these peeling walls. There are\
numbers of them there, hundreds of them underground, with hammers in their\
hands. Oh, yes, we shall be in chains and there will be no freedom, but\
then, in our great sorrow, we shall rise again to joy, without which man\
cannot live nor God exist, for God gives joy: it\'92s His privilege\'97a grand\
one. Ah, man should be dissolved in prayer! What should I be underground\
there without God? Rakitin\'92s laughing! If they drive God from the earth,\
we shall shelter Him underground. One cannot exist in prison without God;\
it\'92s even more impossible than out of prison. And then we men underground\
will sing from the bowels of the earth a glorious hymn to God, with Whom\
is joy. Hail to God and His joy! I love Him!\'94\
\
Mitya was almost gasping for breath as he uttered his wild speech. He\
turned pale, his lips quivered, and tears rolled down his cheeks.\
\
\'93Yes, life is full, there is life even underground,\'94 he began again. \'93You\
wouldn\'92t believe, Alexey, how I want to live now, what a thirst for\
existence and consciousness has sprung up in me within these peeling\
walls. Rakitin doesn\'92t understand that; all he cares about is building a\
house and letting flats. But I\'92ve been longing for you. And what is\
suffering? I am not afraid of it, even if it were beyond reckoning. I am\
not afraid of it now. I was afraid of it before. Do you know, perhaps I\
won\'92t answer at the trial at all.... And I seem to have such strength in\
me now, that I think I could stand anything, any suffering, only to be\
able to say and to repeat to myself every moment, \'91I exist.\'92 In thousands\
of agonies\'97I exist. I\'92m tormented on the rack\'97but I exist! Though I sit\
alone on a pillar\'97I exist! I see the sun, and if I don\'92t see the sun, I\
know it\'92s there. And there\'92s a whole life in that, in knowing that the sun\
is there. Alyosha, my angel, all these philosophies are the death of me.\
Damn them! Brother Ivan\'97\'94\
\
\'93What of brother Ivan?\'94 interrupted Alyosha, but Mitya did not hear.\
\
\'93You see, I never had any of these doubts before, but it was all hidden\
away in me. It was perhaps just because ideas I did not understand were\
surging up in me, that I used to drink and fight and rage. It was to\
stifle them in myself, to still them, to smother them. Ivan is not\
Rakitin, there is an idea in him. Ivan is a sphinx and is silent; he is\
always silent. It\'92s God that\'92s worrying me. That\'92s the only thing that\'92s\
worrying me. What if He doesn\'92t exist? What if Rakitin\'92s right\'97that it\'92s\
an idea made up by men? Then if He doesn\'92t exist, man is the chief of the\
earth, of the universe. Magnificent! Only how is he going to be good\
without God? That\'92s the question. I always come back to that. For whom is\
man going to love then? To whom will he be thankful? To whom will he sing\
the hymn? Rakitin laughs. Rakitin says that one can love humanity without\
God. Well, only a sniveling idiot can maintain that. I can\'92t understand\
it. Life\'92s easy for Rakitin. \'91You\'92d better think about the extension of\
civic rights, or even of keeping down the price of meat. You will show\
your love for humanity more simply and directly by that, than by\
philosophy.\'92 I answered him, \'91Well, but you, without a God, are more\
likely to raise the price of meat, if it suits you, and make a rouble on\
every copeck.\'92 He lost his temper. But after all, what is goodness? Answer\
me that, Alexey. Goodness is one thing with me and another with a\
Chinaman, so it\'92s a relative thing. Or isn\'92t it? Is it not relative? A\
treacherous question! You won\'92t laugh if I tell you it\'92s kept me awake two\
nights. I only wonder now how people can live and think nothing about it.\
Vanity! Ivan has no God. He has an idea. It\'92s beyond me. But he is silent.\
I believe he is a free\uc0\u8208 mason. I asked him, but he is silent. I wanted to\
drink from the springs of his soul\'97he was silent. But once he did drop a\
word.\'94\
\
\'93What did he say?\'94 Alyosha took it up quickly.\
\
\'93I said to him, \'91Then everything is lawful, if it is so?\'92 He frowned.\
\'91Fyodor Pavlovitch, our papa,\'92 he said, \'91was a pig, but his ideas were\
right enough.\'92 That was what he dropped. That was all he said. That was\
going one better than Rakitin.\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 Alyosha assented bitterly. \'93When was he with you?\'94\
\
\'93Of that later; now I must speak of something else. I have said nothing\
about Ivan to you before. I put it off to the last. When my business here\
is over and the verdict has been given, then I\'92ll tell you something. I\'92ll\
tell you everything. We\'92ve something tremendous on hand.... And you shall\
be my judge in it. But don\'92t begin about that now; be silent. You talk of\
to\uc0\u8208 morrow, of the trial; but, would you believe it, I know nothing about\
it.\'94\
\
\'93Have you talked to the counsel?\'94\
\
\'93What\'92s the use of the counsel? I told him all about it. He\'92s a soft,\
city\uc0\u8208 bred rogue\'97a Bernard! But he doesn\'92t believe me\'97not a bit of it. Only\
imagine, he believes I did it. I see it. \'91In that case,\'92 I asked him, \'91why\
have you come to defend me?\'92 Hang them all! They\'92ve got a doctor down,\
too, want to prove I\'92m mad. I won\'92t have that! Katerina Ivanovna wants to\
do her \'91duty\'92 to the end, whatever the strain!\'94 Mitya smiled bitterly.\
\'93The cat! Hard\uc0\u8208 hearted creature! She knows that I said of her at Mokroe\
that she was a woman of \'91great wrath.\'92 They repeated it. Yes, the facts\
against me have grown numerous as the sands of the sea. Grigory sticks to\
his point. Grigory\'92s honest, but a fool. Many people are honest because\
they are fools: that\'92s Rakitin\'92s idea. Grigory\'92s my enemy. And there are\
some people who are better as foes than friends. I mean Katerina Ivanovna.\
I am afraid, oh, I am afraid she will tell how she bowed to the ground\
after that four thousand. She\'92ll pay it back to the last farthing. I don\'92t\
want her sacrifice; they\'92ll put me to shame at the trial. I wonder how I\
can stand it. Go to her, Alyosha, ask her not to speak of that in the\
court, can\'92t you? But damn it all, it doesn\'92t matter! I shall get through\
somehow. I don\'92t pity her. It\'92s her own doing. She deserves what she gets.\
I shall have my own story to tell, Alexey.\'94 He smiled bitterly again.\
\'93Only ... only Grusha, Grusha! Good Lord! Why should she have such\
suffering to bear?\'94 he exclaimed suddenly, with tears. \'93Grusha\'92s killing\
me; the thought of her\'92s killing me, killing me. She was with me just\
now....\'94\
\
\'93She told me she was very much grieved by you to\uc0\u8208 day.\'94\
\
\'93I know. Confound my temper! It was jealousy. I was sorry, I kissed her as\
she was going. I didn\'92t ask her forgiveness.\'94\
\
\'93Why didn\'92t you?\'94 exclaimed Alyosha.\
\
Suddenly Mitya laughed almost mirthfully.\
\
\'93God preserve you, my dear boy, from ever asking forgiveness for a fault\
from a woman you love. From one you love especially, however greatly you\
may have been in fault. For a woman\'97devil only knows what to make of a\
woman! I know something about them, anyway. But try acknowledging you are\
in fault to a woman. Say, \'91I am sorry, forgive me,\'92 and a shower of\
reproaches will follow! Nothing will make her forgive you simply and\
directly, she\'92ll humble you to the dust, bring forward things that have\
never happened, recall everything, forget nothing, add something of her\
own, and only then forgive you. And even the best, the best of them do it.\
She\'92ll scrape up all the scrapings and load them on your head. They are\
ready to flay you alive, I tell you, every one of them, all these angels\
without whom we cannot live! I tell you plainly and openly, dear boy,\
every decent man ought to be under some woman\'92s thumb. That\'92s my\
conviction\'97not conviction, but feeling. A man ought to be magnanimous, and\
it\'92s no disgrace to a man! No disgrace to a hero, not even a C\'e6sar! But\
don\'92t ever beg her pardon all the same for anything. Remember that rule\
given you by your brother Mitya, who\'92s come to ruin through women. No, I\'92d\
better make it up to Grusha somehow, without begging pardon. I worship\
her, Alexey, worship her. Only she doesn\'92t see it. No, she still thinks I\
don\'92t love her enough. And she tortures me, tortures me with her love. The\
past was nothing! In the past it was only those infernal curves of hers\
that tortured me, but now I\'92ve taken all her soul into my soul and through\
her I\'92ve become a man myself. Will they marry us? If they don\'92t, I shall\
die of jealousy. I imagine something every day.... What did she say to you\
about me?\'94\
\
Alyosha repeated all Grushenka had said to him that day. Mitya listened,\
made him repeat things, and seemed pleased.\
\
\'93Then she is not angry at my being jealous?\'94 he exclaimed. \'93She is a\
regular woman! \'91I\'92ve a fierce heart myself!\'92 Ah, I love such fierce\
hearts, though I can\'92t bear any one\'92s being jealous of me. I can\'92t endure\
it. We shall fight. But I shall love her, I shall love her infinitely.\
Will they marry us? Do they let convicts marry? That\'92s the question. And\
without her I can\'92t exist....\'94\
\
Mitya walked frowning across the room. It was almost dark. He suddenly\
seemed terribly worried.\
\
\'93So there\'92s a secret, she says, a secret? We have got up a plot against\
her, and Katya is mixed up in it, she thinks. No, my good Grushenka,\
that\'92s not it. You are very wide of the mark, in your foolish feminine\
way. Alyosha, darling, well, here goes! I\'92ll tell you our secret!\'94\
\
He looked round, went close up quickly to Alyosha, who was standing before\
him, and whispered to him with an air of mystery, though in reality no one\
could hear them: the old warder was dozing in the corner, and not a word\
could reach the ears of the soldiers on guard.\
\
\'93I will tell you all our secret,\'94 Mitya whispered hurriedly. \'93I meant to\
tell you later, for how could I decide on anything without you? You are\
everything to me. Though I say that Ivan is superior to us, you are my\
angel. It\'92s your decision will decide it. Perhaps it\'92s you that is\
superior and not Ivan. You see, it\'92s a question of conscience, question of\
the higher conscience\'97the secret is so important that I can\'92t settle it\
myself, and I\'92ve put it off till I could speak to you. But anyway it\'92s too\
early to decide now, for we must wait for the verdict. As soon as the\
verdict is given, you shall decide my fate. Don\'92t decide it now. I\'92ll tell\
you now. You listen, but don\'92t decide. Stand and keep quiet. I won\'92t tell\
you everything. I\'92ll only tell you the idea, without details, and you keep\
quiet. Not a question, not a movement. You agree? But, goodness, what\
shall I do with your eyes? I\'92m afraid your eyes will tell me your\
decision, even if you don\'92t speak. Oo! I\'92m afraid! Alyosha, listen! Ivan\
suggests my _escaping_. I won\'92t tell you the details: it\'92s all been\
thought out: it can all be arranged. Hush, don\'92t decide. I should go to\
America with Grusha. You know I can\'92t live without Grusha! What if they\
won\'92t let her follow me to Siberia? Do they let convicts get married? Ivan\
thinks not. And without Grusha what should I do there underground with a\
hammer? I should only smash my skull with the hammer! But, on the other\
hand, my conscience? I should have run away from suffering. A sign has\
come, I reject the sign. I have a way of salvation and I turn my back on\
it. Ivan says that in America, \'91with the good\uc0\u8208 will,\'92 I can be of more use\
than underground. But what becomes of our hymn from underground? What\'92s\
America? America is vanity again! And there\'92s a lot of swindling in\
America, too, I expect. I should have run away from crucifixion! I tell\
you, you know, Alexey, because you are the only person who can understand\
this. There\'92s no one else. It\'92s folly, madness to others, all I\'92ve told\
you of the hymn. They\'92ll say I\'92m out of my mind or a fool. I am not out of\
my mind and I am not a fool. Ivan understands about the hymn, too. He\
understands, only he doesn\'92t answer\'97he doesn\'92t speak. He doesn\'92t believe\
in the hymn. Don\'92t speak, don\'92t speak. I see how you look! You have\
already decided. Don\'92t decide, spare me! I can\'92t live without Grusha. Wait\
till after the trial!\'94\
\
Mitya ended beside himself. He held Alyosha with both hands on his\
shoulders, and his yearning, feverish eyes were fixed on his brother\'92s.\
\
\'93They don\'92t let convicts marry, do they?\'94 he repeated for the third time\
in a supplicating voice.\
\
Alyosha listened with extreme surprise and was deeply moved.\
\
\'93Tell me one thing,\'94 he said. \'93Is Ivan very keen on it, and whose idea was\
it?\'94\
\
\'93His, his, and he is very keen on it. He didn\'92t come to see me at first,\
then he suddenly came a week ago and he began about it straight away. He\
is awfully keen on it. He doesn\'92t ask me, but orders me to escape. He\
doesn\'92t doubt of my obeying him, though I showed him all my heart as I\
have to you, and told him about the hymn, too. He told me he\'92d arrange it;\
he\'92s found out about everything. But of that later. He\'92s simply set on it.\
It\'92s all a matter of money: he\'92ll pay ten thousand for escape and give me\
twenty thousand for America. And he says we can arrange a magnificent\
escape for ten thousand.\'94\
\
\'93And he told you on no account to tell me?\'94 Alyosha asked again.\
\
\'93To tell no one, and especially not you; on no account to tell you. He is\
afraid, no doubt, that you\'92ll stand before me as my conscience. Don\'92t tell\
him I told you. Don\'92t tell him, for anything.\'94\
\
\'93You are right,\'94 Alyosha pronounced; \'93it\'92s impossible to decide anything\
before the trial is over. After the trial you\'92ll decide of yourself. Then\
you\'92ll find that new man in yourself and he will decide.\'94\
\
\'93A new man, or a Bernard who\'92ll decide _\'e0 la_ Bernard, for I believe I\'92m a\
contemptible Bernard myself,\'94 said Mitya, with a bitter grin.\
\
\'93But, brother, have you no hope then of being acquitted?\'94\
\
Mitya shrugged his shoulders nervously and shook his head. \'93Alyosha,\
darling, it\'92s time you were going,\'94 he said, with a sudden haste. \'93There\'92s\
the superintendent shouting in the yard. He\'92ll be here directly. We are\
late; it\'92s irregular. Embrace me quickly. Kiss me! Sign me with the cross,\
darling, for the cross I have to bear to\uc0\u8208 morrow.\'94\
\
They embraced and kissed.\
\
\'93Ivan,\'94 said Mitya suddenly, \'93suggests my escaping; but, of course, he\
believes I did it.\'94\
\
A mournful smile came on to his lips.\
\
\'93Have you asked him whether he believes it?\'94 asked Alyosha.\
\
\'93No, I haven\'92t. I wanted to, but I couldn\'92t. I hadn\'92t the courage. But I\
saw it from his eyes. Well, good\uc0\u8208 by!\'94\
\
Once more they kissed hurriedly, and Alyosha was just going out, when\
Mitya suddenly called him back.\
\
\'93Stand facing me! That\'92s right!\'94 And again he seized Alyosha, putting both\
hands on his shoulders. His face became suddenly quite pale, so that it\
was dreadfully apparent, even through the gathering darkness. His lips\
twitched, his eyes fastened upon Alyosha.\
\
\'93Alyosha, tell me the whole truth, as you would before God. Do you believe\
I did it? Do you, do you in yourself, believe it? The whole truth, don\'92t\
lie!\'94 he cried desperately.\
\
Everything seemed heaving before Alyosha, and he felt something like a\
stab at his heart.\
\
\'93Hush! What do you mean?\'94 he faltered helplessly.\
\
\'93The whole truth, the whole, don\'92t lie!\'94 repeated Mitya.\
\
\'93I\'92ve never for one instant believed that you were the murderer!\'94 broke in\
a shaking voice from Alyosha\'92s breast, and he raised his right hand in the\
air, as though calling God to witness his words.\
\
Mitya\'92s whole face was lighted up with bliss.\
\
\'93Thank you!\'94 he articulated slowly, as though letting a sigh escape him\
after fainting. \'93Now you have given me new life. Would you believe it,\
till this moment I\'92ve been afraid to ask you, you, even you. Well, go!\
You\'92ve given me strength for to\uc0\u8208 morrow. God bless you! Come, go along!\
Love Ivan!\'94 was Mitya\'92s last word.\
\
Alyosha went out in tears. Such distrustfulness in Mitya, such lack of\
confidence even to him, to Alyosha\'97all this suddenly opened before Alyosha\
an unsuspected depth of hopeless grief and despair in the soul of his\
unhappy brother. Intense, infinite compassion overwhelmed him instantly.\
There was a poignant ache in his torn heart. \'93Love Ivan!\'94\'97he suddenly\
recalled Mitya\'92s words. And he was going to Ivan. He badly wanted to see\
Ivan all day. He was as much worried about Ivan as about Mitya, and more\
than ever now.\
\
\
\
Chapter V. Not You, Not You!\
\
\
On the way to Ivan he had to pass the house where Katerina Ivanovna was\
living. There was light in the windows. He suddenly stopped and resolved\
to go in. He had not seen Katerina Ivanovna for more than a week. But now\
it struck him that Ivan might be with her, especially on the eve of the\
terrible day. Ringing, and mounting the staircase, which was dimly lighted\
by a Chinese lantern, he saw a man coming down, and as they met, he\
recognized him as his brother. So he was just coming from Katerina\
Ivanovna.\
\
\'93Ah, it\'92s only you,\'94 said Ivan dryly. \'93Well, good\uc0\u8208 by! You are going to\
her?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t advise you to; she\'92s upset and you\'92ll upset her more.\'94\
\
A door was instantly flung open above, and a voice cried suddenly:\
\
\'93No, no! Alexey Fyodorovitch, have you come from him?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I have been with him.\'94\
\
\'93Has he sent me any message? Come up, Alyosha, and you, Ivan Fyodorovitch,\
you must come back, you must. Do you hear?\'94\
\
There was such a peremptory note in Katya\'92s voice that Ivan, after a\
moment\'92s hesitation, made up his mind to go back with Alyosha.\
\
\'93She was listening,\'94 he murmured angrily to himself, but Alyosha heard it.\
\
\'93Excuse my keeping my greatcoat on,\'94 said Ivan, going into the drawing\uc0\u8208 \
room. \'93I won\'92t sit down. I won\'92t stay more than a minute.\'94\
\
\'93Sit down, Alexey Fyodorovitch,\'94 said Katerina Ivanovna, though she\
remained standing. She had changed very little during this time, but there\
was an ominous gleam in her dark eyes. Alyosha remembered afterwards that\
she had struck him as particularly handsome at that moment.\
\
\'93What did he ask you to tell me?\'94\
\
\'93Only one thing,\'94 said Alyosha, looking her straight in the face, \'93that\
you would spare yourself and say nothing at the trial of what\'94 (he was a\
little confused) \'93... passed between you ... at the time of your first\
acquaintance ... in that town.\'94\
\
\'93Ah! that I bowed down to the ground for that money!\'94 She broke into a\
bitter laugh. \'93Why, is he afraid for me or for himself? He asks me to\
spare\'97whom? Him or myself? Tell me, Alexey Fyodorovitch!\'94\
\
Alyosha watched her intently, trying to understand her.\
\
\'93Both yourself and him,\'94 he answered softly.\
\
\'93I am glad to hear it,\'94 she snapped out maliciously, and she suddenly\
blushed.\
\
\'93You don\'92t know me yet, Alexey Fyodorovitch,\'94 she said menacingly. \'93And I\
don\'92t know myself yet. Perhaps you\'92ll want to trample me under foot after\
my examination to\uc0\u8208 morrow.\'94\
\
\'93You will give your evidence honorably,\'94 said Alyosha; \'93that\'92s all that\'92s\
wanted.\'94\
\
\'93Women are often dishonorable,\'94 she snarled. \'93Only an hour ago I was\
thinking I felt afraid to touch that monster ... as though he were a\
reptile ... but no, he is still a human being to me! But did he do it? Is\
he the murderer?\'94 she cried, all of a sudden, hysterically, turning\
quickly to Ivan. Alyosha saw at once that she had asked Ivan that question\
before, perhaps only a moment before he came in, and not for the first\
time, but for the hundredth, and that they had ended by quarreling.\
\
\'93I\'92ve been to see Smerdyakov.... It was you, you who persuaded me that he\
murdered his father. It\'92s only you I believed!\'94 she continued, still\
addressing Ivan. He gave her a sort of strained smile. Alyosha started at\
her tone. He had not suspected such familiar intimacy between them.\
\
\'93Well, that\'92s enough, anyway,\'94 Ivan cut short the conversation. \'93I am\
going. I\'92ll come to\uc0\u8208 morrow.\'94 And turning at once, he walked out of the\
room and went straight downstairs.\
\
With an imperious gesture, Katerina Ivanovna seized Alyosha by both hands.\
\
\'93Follow him! Overtake him! Don\'92t leave him alone for a minute!\'94 she said,\
in a hurried whisper. \'93He\'92s mad! Don\'92t you know that he\'92s mad? He is in a\
fever, nervous fever. The doctor told me so. Go, run after him....\'94\
\
Alyosha jumped up and ran after Ivan, who was not fifty paces ahead of\
him.\
\
\'93What do you want?\'94 He turned quickly on Alyosha, seeing that he was\
running after him. \'93She told you to catch me up, because I\'92m mad. I know\
it all by heart,\'94 he added irritably.\
\
\'93She is mistaken, of course; but she is right that you are ill,\'94 said\
Alyosha. \'93I was looking at your face just now. You look very ill, Ivan.\'94\
\
Ivan walked on without stopping. Alyosha followed him.\
\
\'93And do you know, Alexey Fyodorovitch, how people do go out of their\
mind?\'94 Ivan asked in a voice suddenly quiet, without a trace of\
irritation, with a note of the simplest curiosity.\
\
\'93No, I don\'92t. I suppose there are all kinds of insanity.\'94\
\
\'93And can one observe that one\'92s going mad oneself?\'94\
\
\'93I imagine one can\'92t see oneself clearly in such circumstances,\'94 Alyosha\
answered with surprise.\
\
Ivan paused for half a minute.\
\
\'93If you want to talk to me, please change the subject,\'94 he said suddenly.\
\
\'93Oh, while I think of it, I have a letter for you,\'94 said Alyosha timidly,\
and he took Lise\'92s note from his pocket and held it out to Ivan. They were\
just under a lamp\uc0\u8208 post. Ivan recognized the handwriting at once.\
\
\'93Ah, from that little demon!\'94 he laughed maliciously, and, without opening\
the envelope, he tore it into bits and threw it in the air. The bits were\
scattered by the wind.\
\
\'93She\'92s not sixteen yet, I believe, and already offering herself,\'94 he said\
contemptuously, striding along the street again.\
\
\'93How do you mean, offering herself?\'94 exclaimed Alyosha.\
\
\'93As wanton women offer themselves, to be sure.\'94\
\
\'93How can you, Ivan, how can you?\'94 Alyosha cried warmly, in a grieved\
voice. \'93She is a child; you are insulting a child! She is ill; she is very\
ill, too. She is on the verge of insanity, too, perhaps.... I had hoped to\
hear something from you ... that would save her.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ll hear nothing from me. If she is a child I am not her nurse. Be\
quiet, Alexey. Don\'92t go on about her. I am not even thinking about it.\'94\
\
They were silent again for a moment.\
\
\'93She will be praying all night now to the Mother of God to show her how to\
act to\uc0\u8208 morrow at the trial,\'94 he said sharply and angrily again.\
\
\'93You ... you mean Katerina Ivanovna?\'94\
\
\'93Yes. Whether she\'92s to save Mitya or ruin him. She\'92ll pray for light from\
above. She can\'92t make up her mind for herself, you see. She has not had\
time to decide yet. She takes me for her nurse, too. She wants me to sing\
lullabies to her.\'94\
\
\'93Katerina Ivanovna loves you, brother,\'94 said Alyosha sadly.\
\
\'93Perhaps; but I am not very keen on her.\'94\
\
\'93She is suffering. Why do you ... sometimes say things to her that give\
her hope?\'94 Alyosha went on, with timid reproach. \'93I know that you\'92ve given\
her hope. Forgive me for speaking to you like this,\'94 he added.\
\
\'93I can\'92t behave to her as I ought\'97break off altogether and tell her so\
straight out,\'94 said Ivan, irritably. \'93I must wait till sentence is passed\
on the murderer. If I break off with her now, she will avenge herself on\
me by ruining that scoundrel to\uc0\u8208 morrow at the trial, for she hates him and\
knows she hates him. It\'92s all a lie\'97lie upon lie! As long as I don\'92t break\
off with her, she goes on hoping, and she won\'92t ruin that monster, knowing\
how I want to get him out of trouble. If only that damned verdict would\
come!\'94\
\
The words \'93murderer\'94 and \'93monster\'94 echoed painfully in Alyosha\'92s heart.\
\
\'93But how can she ruin Mitya?\'94 he asked, pondering on Ivan\'92s words. \'93What\
evidence can she give that would ruin Mitya?\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t know that yet. She\'92s got a document in her hands, in Mitya\'92s\
own writing, that proves conclusively that he did murder Fyodor\
Pavlovitch.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s impossible!\'94 cried Alyosha.\
\
\'93Why is it impossible? I\'92ve read it myself.\'94\
\
\'93There can\'92t be such a document!\'94 Alyosha repeated warmly. \'93There can\'92t\
be, because he\'92s not the murderer. It\'92s not he murdered father, not he!\'94\
\
Ivan suddenly stopped.\
\
\'93Who is the murderer then, according to you?\'94 he asked, with apparent\
coldness. There was even a supercilious note in his voice.\
\
\'93You know who,\'94 Alyosha pronounced in a low, penetrating voice.\
\
\'93Who? You mean the myth about that crazy idiot, the epileptic,\
Smerdyakov?\'94\
\
Alyosha suddenly felt himself trembling all over.\
\
\'93You know who,\'94 broke helplessly from him. He could scarcely breathe.\
\
\'93Who? Who?\'94 Ivan cried almost fiercely. All his restraint suddenly\
vanished.\
\
\'93I only know one thing,\'94 Alyosha went on, still almost in a whisper, \'93_it\
wasn\'92t you_ killed father.\'94\
\
\'93 \'91Not you\'92! What do you mean by \'91not you\'92?\'94 Ivan was thunderstruck.\
\
\'93It was not you killed father, not you!\'94 Alyosha repeated firmly.\
\
The silence lasted for half a minute.\
\
\'93I know I didn\'92t. Are you raving?\'94 said Ivan, with a pale, distorted\
smile. His eyes were riveted on Alyosha. They were standing again under a\
lamp\uc0\u8208 post.\
\
\'93No, Ivan. You\'92ve told yourself several times that you are the murderer.\'94\
\
\'93When did I say so? I was in Moscow.... When have I said so?\'94 Ivan\
faltered helplessly.\
\
\'93You\'92ve said so to yourself many times, when you\'92ve been alone during\
these two dreadful months,\'94 Alyosha went on softly and distinctly as\
before. Yet he was speaking now, as it were, not of himself, not of his\
own will, but obeying some irresistible command. \'93You have accused\
yourself and have confessed to yourself that you are the murderer and no\
one else. But you didn\'92t do it: you are mistaken: you are not the\
murderer. Do you hear? It was not you! God has sent me to tell you so.\'94\
\
They were both silent. The silence lasted a whole long minute. They were\
both standing still, gazing into each other\'92s eyes. They were both pale.\
Suddenly Ivan began trembling all over, and clutched Alyosha\'92s shoulder.\
\
\'93You\'92ve been in my room!\'94 he whispered hoarsely. \'93You\'92ve been there at\
night, when he came.... Confess ... have you seen him, have you seen him?\'94\
\
\'93Whom do you mean\'97Mitya?\'94 Alyosha asked, bewildered.\
\
\'93Not him, damn the monster!\'94 Ivan shouted, in a frenzy. \'93Do you know that\
he visits me? How did you find out? Speak!\'94\
\
\'93Who is _he_! I don\'92t know whom you are talking about,\'94 Alyosha faltered,\
beginning to be alarmed.\
\
\'93Yes, you do know ... or how could you\'97? It\'92s impossible that you don\'92t\
know.\'94\
\
Suddenly he seemed to check himself. He stood still and seemed to reflect.\
A strange grin contorted his lips.\
\
\'93Brother,\'94 Alyosha began again, in a shaking voice, \'93I have said this to\
you, because you\'92ll believe my word, I know that. I tell you once and for\
all, it\'92s not you. You hear, once for all! God has put it into my heart to\
say this to you, even though it may make you hate me from this hour.\'94\
\
But by now Ivan had apparently regained his self\uc0\u8208 control.\
\
\'93Alexey Fyodorovitch,\'94 he said, with a cold smile, \'93I can\'92t endure\
prophets and epileptics\'97messengers from God especially\'97and you know that\
only too well. I break off all relations with you from this moment and\
probably for ever. I beg you to leave me at this turning. It\'92s the way to\
your lodgings, too. You\'92d better be particularly careful not to come to me\
to\uc0\u8208 day! Do you hear?\'94\
\
He turned and walked on with a firm step, not looking back.\
\
\'93Brother,\'94 Alyosha called after him, \'93if anything happens to you to\uc0\u8208 day,\
turn to me before any one!\'94\
\
But Ivan made no reply. Alyosha stood under the lamp\uc0\u8208 post at the cross\
roads, till Ivan had vanished into the darkness. Then he turned and walked\
slowly homewards. Both Alyosha and Ivan were living in lodgings; neither\
of them was willing to live in Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s empty house. Alyosha\
had a furnished room in the house of some working people. Ivan lived some\
distance from him. He had taken a roomy and fairly comfortable lodge\
attached to a fine house that belonged to a well\uc0\u8208 to\u8208 do lady, the widow of\
an official. But his only attendant was a deaf and rheumatic old crone who\
went to bed at six o\'92clock every evening and got up at six in the morning.\
Ivan had become remarkably indifferent to his comforts of late, and very\
fond of being alone. He did everything for himself in the one room he\
lived in, and rarely entered any of the other rooms in his abode.\
\
He reached the gate of the house and had his hand on the bell, when he\
suddenly stopped. He felt that he was trembling all over with anger.\
Suddenly he let go of the bell, turned back with a curse, and walked with\
rapid steps in the opposite direction. He walked a mile and a half to a\
tiny, slanting, wooden house, almost a hut, where Marya Kondratyevna, the\
neighbor who used to come to Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s kitchen for soup and to\
whom Smerdyakov had once sung his songs and played on the guitar, was now\
lodging. She had sold their little house, and was now living here with her\
mother. Smerdyakov, who was ill\'97almost dying\'97had been with them ever since\
Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s death. It was to him Ivan was going now, drawn by a\
sudden and irresistible prompting.\
\
\
\
Chapter VI. The First Interview With Smerdyakov\
\
\
This was the third time that Ivan had been to see Smerdyakov since his\
return from Moscow. The first time he had seen him and talked to him was\
on the first day of his arrival, then he had visited him once more, a\
fortnight later. But his visits had ended with that second one, so that it\
was now over a month since he had seen him. And he had scarcely heard\
anything of him.\
\
Ivan had only returned five days after his father\'92s death, so that he was\
not present at the funeral, which took place the day before he came back.\
The cause of his delay was that Alyosha, not knowing his Moscow address,\
had to apply to Katerina Ivanovna to telegraph to him, and she, not\
knowing his address either, telegraphed to her sister and aunt, reckoning\
on Ivan\'92s going to see them as soon as he arrived in Moscow. But he did\
not go to them till four days after his arrival. When he got the telegram,\
he had, of course, set off post\uc0\u8208 haste to our town. The first to meet him\
was Alyosha, and Ivan was greatly surprised to find that, in opposition to\
the general opinion of the town, he refused to entertain a suspicion\
against Mitya, and spoke openly of Smerdyakov as the murderer. Later on,\
after seeing the police captain and the prosecutor, and hearing the\
details of the charge and the arrest, he was still more surprised at\
Alyosha, and ascribed his opinion only to his exaggerated brotherly\
feeling and sympathy with Mitya, of whom Alyosha, as Ivan knew, was very\
fond.\
\
By the way, let us say a word or two of Ivan\'92s feeling to his brother\
Dmitri. He positively disliked him; at most, felt sometimes a compassion\
for him, and even that was mixed with great contempt, almost repugnance.\
Mitya\'92s whole personality, even his appearance, was extremely unattractive\
to him. Ivan looked with indignation on Katerina Ivanovna\'92s love for his\
brother. Yet he went to see Mitya on the first day of his arrival, and\
that interview, far from shaking Ivan\'92s belief in his guilt, positively\
strengthened it. He found his brother agitated, nervously excited. Mitya\
had been talkative, but very absent\uc0\u8208 minded and incoherent. He used violent\
language, accused Smerdyakov, and was fearfully muddled. He talked\
principally about the three thousand roubles, which he said had been\
\'93stolen\'94 from him by his father.\
\
\'93The money was mine, it was my money,\'94 Mitya kept repeating. \'93Even if I\
had stolen it, I should have had the right.\'94\
\
He hardly contested the evidence against him, and if he tried to turn a\
fact to his advantage, it was in an absurd and incoherent way. He hardly\
seemed to wish to defend himself to Ivan or any one else. Quite the\
contrary, he was angry and proudly scornful of the charges against him; he\
was continually firing up and abusing every one. He only laughed\
contemptuously at Grigory\'92s evidence about the open door, and declared\
that it was \'93the devil that opened it.\'94 But he could not bring forward any\
coherent explanation of the fact. He even succeeded in insulting Ivan\
during their first interview, telling him sharply that it was not for\
people who declared that \'93everything was lawful,\'94 to suspect and question\
him. Altogether he was anything but friendly with Ivan on that occasion.\
Immediately after that interview with Mitya, Ivan went for the first time\
to see Smerdyakov.\
\
In the railway train on his way from Moscow, he kept thinking of\
Smerdyakov and of his last conversation with him on the evening before he\
went away. Many things seemed to him puzzling and suspicious. But when he\
gave his evidence to the investigating lawyer Ivan said nothing, for the\
time, of that conversation. He put that off till he had seen Smerdyakov,\
who was at that time in the hospital.\
\
Doctor Herzenstube and Varvinsky, the doctor he met in the hospital,\
confidently asserted in reply to Ivan\'92s persistent questions, that\
Smerdyakov\'92s epileptic attack was unmistakably genuine, and were surprised\
indeed at Ivan asking whether he might not have been shamming on the day\
of the catastrophe. They gave him to understand that the attack was an\
exceptional one, the fits persisting and recurring several times, so that\
the patient\'92s life was positively in danger, and it was only now, after\
they had applied remedies, that they could assert with confidence that the\
patient would survive. \'93Though it might well be,\'94 added Doctor\
Herzenstube, \'93that his reason would be impaired for a considerable period,\
if not permanently.\'94 On Ivan\'92s asking impatiently whether that meant that\
he was now mad, they told him that this was not yet the case, in the full\
sense of the word, but that certain abnormalities were perceptible. Ivan\
decided to find out for himself what those abnormalities were.\
\
At the hospital he was at once allowed to see the patient. Smerdyakov was\
lying on a truckle\uc0\u8208 bed in a separate ward. There was only one other bed in\
the room, and in it lay a tradesman of the town, swollen with dropsy, who\
was obviously almost dying; he could be no hindrance to their\
conversation. Smerdyakov grinned uncertainly on seeing Ivan, and for the\
first instant seemed nervous. So at least Ivan fancied. But that was only\
momentary. For the rest of the time he was struck, on the contrary, by\
Smerdyakov\'92s composure. From the first glance Ivan had no doubt that he\
was very ill. He was very weak; he spoke slowly, seeming to move his\
tongue with difficulty; he was much thinner and sallower. Throughout the\
interview, which lasted twenty minutes, he kept complaining of headache\
and of pain in all his limbs. His thin emasculate face seemed to have\
become so tiny; his hair was ruffled, and his crest of curls in front\
stood up in a thin tuft. But in the left eye, which was screwed up and\
seemed to be insinuating something, Smerdyakov showed himself unchanged.\
\'93It\'92s always worth while speaking to a clever man.\'94 Ivan was reminded of\
that at once. He sat down on the stool at his feet. Smerdyakov, with\
painful effort, shifted his position in bed, but he was not the first to\
speak. He remained dumb, and did not even look much interested.\
\
\'93Can you talk to me?\'94 asked Ivan. \'93I won\'92t tire you much.\'94\
\
\'93Certainly I can,\'94 mumbled Smerdyakov, in a faint voice. \'93Has your honor\
been back long?\'94 he added patronizingly, as though encouraging a nervous\
visitor.\
\
\'93I only arrived to\uc0\u8208 day.... To see the mess you are in here.\'94 Smerdyakov\
sighed.\
\
\'93Why do you sigh? You knew of it all along,\'94 Ivan blurted out.\
\
Smerdyakov was stolidly silent for a while.\
\
\'93How could I help knowing? It was clear beforehand. But how could I tell\
it would turn out like that?\'94\
\
\'93What would turn out? Don\'92t prevaricate! You\'92ve foretold you\'92d have a fit;\
on the way down to the cellar, you know. You mentioned the very spot.\'94\
\
\'93Have you said so at the examination yet?\'94 Smerdyakov queried with\
composure.\
\
Ivan felt suddenly angry.\
\
\'93No, I haven\'92t yet, but I certainly shall. You must explain a great deal\
to me, my man; and let me tell you, I am not going to let you play with\
me!\'94\
\
\'93Why should I play with you, when I put my whole trust in you, as in God\
Almighty?\'94 said Smerdyakov, with the same composure, only for a moment\
closing his eyes.\
\
\'93In the first place,\'94 began Ivan, \'93I know that epileptic fits can\'92t be\
told beforehand. I\'92ve inquired; don\'92t try and take me in. You can\'92t\
foretell the day and the hour. How was it you told me the day and the hour\
beforehand, and about the cellar, too? How could you tell that you would\
fall down the cellar stairs in a fit, if you didn\'92t sham a fit on\
purpose?\'94\
\
\'93I had to go to the cellar anyway, several times a day, indeed,\'94\
Smerdyakov drawled deliberately. \'93I fell from the garret just in the same\
way a year ago. It\'92s quite true you can\'92t tell the day and hour of a fit\
beforehand, but you can always have a presentiment of it.\'94\
\
\'93But you did foretell the day and the hour!\'94\
\
\'93In regard to my epilepsy, sir, you had much better inquire of the doctors\
here. You can ask them whether it was a real fit or a sham; it\'92s no use my\
saying any more about it.\'94\
\
\'93And the cellar? How could you know beforehand of the cellar?\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t seem able to get over that cellar! As I was going down to the\
cellar, I was in terrible dread and doubt. What frightened me most was\
losing you and being left without defense in all the world. So I went down\
into the cellar thinking, \'91Here, it\'92ll come on directly, it\'92ll strike me\
down directly, shall I fall?\'92 And it was through this fear that I suddenly\
felt the spasm that always comes ... and so I went flying. All that and\
all my previous conversation with you at the gate the evening before, when\
I told you how frightened I was and spoke of the cellar, I told all that\
to Doctor Herzenstube and Nikolay Parfenovitch, the investigating lawyer,\
and it\'92s all been written down in the protocol. And the doctor here, Mr.\
Varvinsky, maintained to all of them that it was just the thought of it\
brought it on, the apprehension that I might fall. It was just then that\
the fit seized me. And so they\'92ve written it down, that it\'92s just how it\
must have happened, simply from my fear.\'94\
\
As he finished, Smerdyakov drew a deep breath, as though exhausted.\
\
\'93Then you have said all that in your evidence?\'94 said Ivan, somewhat taken\
aback. He had meant to frighten him with the threat of repeating their\
conversation, and it appeared that Smerdyakov had already reported it all\
himself.\
\
\'93What have I to be afraid of? Let them write down the whole truth,\'94\
Smerdyakov pronounced firmly.\
\
\'93And have you told them every word of our conversation at the gate?\'94\
\
\'93No, not to say every word.\'94\
\
\'93And did you tell them that you can sham fits, as you boasted then?\'94\
\
\'93No, I didn\'92t tell them that either.\'94\
\
\'93Tell me now, why did you send me then to Tchermashnya?\'94\
\
\'93I was afraid you\'92d go away to Moscow; Tchermashnya is nearer, anyway.\'94\
\
\'93You are lying; you suggested my going away yourself; you told me to get\
out of the way of trouble.\'94\
\
\'93That was simply out of affection and my sincere devotion to you,\
foreseeing trouble in the house, to spare you. Only I wanted to spare\
myself even more. That\'92s why I told you to get out of harm\'92s way, that you\
might understand that there would be trouble in the house, and would\
remain at home to protect your father.\'94\
\
\'93You might have said it more directly, you blockhead!\'94 Ivan suddenly fired\
up.\
\
\'93How could I have said it more directly then? It was simply my fear that\
made me speak, and you might have been angry, too. I might well have been\
apprehensive that Dmitri Fyodorovitch would make a scene and carry away\
that money, for he considered it as good as his own; but who could tell\
that it would end in a murder like this? I thought that he would only\
carry off the three thousand that lay under the master\'92s mattress in the\
envelope, and you see, he\'92s murdered him. How could you guess it either,\
sir?\'94\
\
\'93But if you say yourself that it couldn\'92t be guessed, how could I have\
guessed and stayed at home? You contradict yourself!\'94 said Ivan,\
pondering.\
\
\'93You might have guessed from my sending you to Tchermashnya and not to\
Moscow.\'94\
\
\'93How could I guess it from that?\'94\
\
Smerdyakov seemed much exhausted, and again he was silent for a minute.\
\
\'93You might have guessed from the fact of my asking you not to go to\
Moscow, but to Tchermashnya, that I wanted to have you nearer, for\
Moscow\'92s a long way off, and Dmitri Fyodorovitch, knowing you are not far\
off, would not be so bold. And if anything had happened, you might have\
come to protect me, too, for I warned you of Grigory Vassilyevitch\'92s\
illness, and that I was afraid of having a fit. And when I explained those\
knocks to you, by means of which one could go in to the deceased, and that\
Dmitri Fyodorovitch knew them all through me, I thought that you would\
guess yourself that he would be sure to do something, and so wouldn\'92t go\
to Tchermashnya even, but would stay.\'94\
\
\'93He talks very coherently,\'94 thought Ivan, \'93though he does mumble; what\'92s\
the derangement of his faculties that Herzenstube talked of?\'94\
\
\'93You are cunning with me, damn you!\'94 he exclaimed, getting angry.\
\
\'93But I thought at the time that you quite guessed,\'94 Smerdyakov parried\
with the simplest air.\
\
\'93If I\'92d guessed, I should have stayed,\'94 cried Ivan.\
\
\'93Why, I thought that it was because you guessed, that you went away in\
such a hurry, only to get out of trouble, only to run away and save\
yourself in your fright.\'94\
\
\'93You think that every one is as great a coward as yourself?\'94\
\
\'93Forgive me, I thought you were like me.\'94\
\
\'93Of course, I ought to have guessed,\'94 Ivan said in agitation; \'93and I did\
guess there was some mischief brewing on your part ... only you are lying,\
you are lying again,\'94 he cried, suddenly recollecting. \'93Do you remember\
how you went up to the carriage and said to me, \'91It\'92s always worth while\
speaking to a clever man\'92? So you were glad I went away, since you praised\
me?\'94\
\
Smerdyakov sighed again and again. A trace of color came into his face.\
\
\'93If I was pleased,\'94 he articulated rather breathlessly, \'93it was simply\
because you agreed not to go to Moscow, but to Tchermashnya. For it was\
nearer, anyway. Only when I said these words to you, it was not by way of\
praise, but of reproach. You didn\'92t understand it.\'94\
\
\'93What reproach?\'94\
\
\'93Why, that foreseeing such a calamity you deserted your own father, and\
would not protect us, for I might have been taken up any time for stealing\
that three thousand.\'94\
\
\'93Damn you!\'94 Ivan swore again. \'93Stay, did you tell the prosecutor and the\
investigating lawyer about those knocks?\'94\
\
\'93I told them everything just as it was.\'94\
\
Ivan wondered inwardly again.\
\
\'93If I thought of anything then,\'94 he began again, \'93it was solely of some\
wickedness on your part. Dmitri might kill him, but that he would steal\'97I\
did not believe that then.... But I was prepared for any wickedness from\
you. You told me yourself you could sham a fit. What did you say that\
for?\'94\
\
\'93It was just through my simplicity, and I never have shammed a fit on\
purpose in my life. And I only said so then to boast to you. It was just\
foolishness. I liked you so much then, and was open\uc0\u8208 hearted with you.\'94\
\
\'93My brother directly accuses you of the murder and theft.\'94\
\
\'93What else is left for him to do?\'94 said Smerdyakov, with a bitter grin.\
\'93And who will believe him with all the proofs against him? Grigory\
Vassilyevitch saw the door open. What can he say after that? But never\
mind him! He is trembling to save himself.\'94\
\
He slowly ceased speaking; then suddenly, as though on reflection, added:\
\
\'93And look here again. He wants to throw it on me and make out that it is\
the work of my hands\'97I\'92ve heard that already. But as to my being clever at\
shamming a fit: should I have told you beforehand that I could sham one,\
if I really had had such a design against your father? If I had been\
planning such a murder could I have been such a fool as to give such\
evidence against myself beforehand? And to his son, too! Upon my word! Is\
that likely? As if that could be, such a thing has never happened. No one\
hears this talk of ours now, except Providence itself, and if you were to\
tell of it to the prosecutor and Nikolay Parfenovitch you might defend me\
completely by doing so, for who would be likely to be such a criminal, if\
he is so open\uc0\u8208 hearted beforehand? Any one can see that.\'94\
\
\'93Well,\'94 and Ivan got up to cut short the conversation, struck by\
Smerdyakov\'92s last argument. \'93I don\'92t suspect you at all, and I think it\'92s\
absurd, indeed, to suspect you. On the contrary, I am grateful to you for\
setting my mind at rest. Now I am going, but I\'92ll come again. Meanwhile,\
good\uc0\u8208 by. Get well. Is there anything you want?\'94\
\
\'93I am very thankful for everything. Marfa Ignatyevna does not forget me,\
and provides me anything I want, according to her kindness. Good people\
visit me every day.\'94\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by. But I shan\'92t say anything of your being able to sham a fit, and\
I don\'92t advise you to, either,\'94 something made Ivan say suddenly.\
\
\'93I quite understand. And if you don\'92t speak of that, I shall say nothing\
of that conversation of ours at the gate.\'94\
\
Then it happened that Ivan went out, and only when he had gone a dozen\
steps along the corridor, he suddenly felt that there was an insulting\
significance in Smerdyakov\'92s last words. He was almost on the point of\
turning back, but it was only a passing impulse, and muttering,\
\'93Nonsense!\'94 he went out of the hospital.\
\
His chief feeling was one of relief at the fact that it was not\
Smerdyakov, but Mitya, who had committed the murder, though he might have\
been expected to feel the opposite. He did not want to analyze the reason\
for this feeling, and even felt a positive repugnance at prying into his\
sensations. He felt as though he wanted to make haste to forget something.\
In the following days he became convinced of Mitya\'92s guilt, as he got to\
know all the weight of evidence against him. There was evidence of people\
of no importance, Fenya and her mother, for instance, but the effect of it\
was almost overpowering. As to Perhotin, the people at the tavern, and at\
Plotnikov\'92s shop, as well as the witnesses at Mokroe, their evidence\
seemed conclusive. It was the details that were so damning. The secret of\
the knocks impressed the lawyers almost as much as Grigory\'92s evidence as\
to the open door. Grigory\'92s wife, Marfa, in answer to Ivan\'92s questions,\
declared that Smerdyakov had been lying all night the other side of the\
partition wall. \'93He was not three paces from our bed,\'94 and that although\
she was a sound sleeper she waked several times and heard him moaning, \'93He\
was moaning the whole time, moaning continually.\'94\
\
Talking to Herzenstube, and giving it as his opinion that Smerdyakov was\
not mad, but only rather weak, Ivan only evoked from the old man a subtle\
smile.\
\
\'93Do you know how he spends his time now?\'94 he asked; \'93learning lists of\
French words by heart. He has an exercise\uc0\u8208 book under his pillow with the\
French words written out in Russian letters for him by some one, he he\
he!\'94\
\
Ivan ended by dismissing all doubts. He could not think of Dmitri without\
repulsion. Only one thing was strange, however. Alyosha persisted that\
Dmitri was not the murderer, and that \'93in all probability\'94 Smerdyakov was.\
Ivan always felt that Alyosha\'92s opinion meant a great deal to him, and so\
he was astonished at it now. Another thing that was strange was that\
Alyosha did not make any attempt to talk about Mitya with Ivan, that he\
never began on the subject and only answered his questions. This, too,\
struck Ivan particularly.\
\
But he was very much preoccupied at that time with something quite apart\
from that. On his return from Moscow, he abandoned himself hopelessly to\
his mad and consuming passion for Katerina Ivanovna. This is not the time\
to begin to speak of this new passion of Ivan\'92s, which left its mark on\
all the rest of his life: this would furnish the subject for another\
novel, which I may perhaps never write. But I cannot omit to mention here\
that when Ivan, on leaving Katerina Ivanovna with Alyosha, as I\'92ve related\
already, told him, \'93I am not keen on her,\'94 it was an absolute lie: he\
loved her madly, though at times he hated her so that he might have\
murdered her. Many causes helped to bring about this feeling. Shattered by\
what had happened with Mitya, she rushed on Ivan\'92s return to meet him as\
her one salvation. She was hurt, insulted and humiliated in her feelings.\
And here the man had come back to her, who had loved her so ardently\
before (oh! she knew that very well), and whose heart and intellect she\
considered so superior to her own. But the sternly virtuous girl did not\
abandon herself altogether to the man she loved, in spite of the Karamazov\
violence of his passions and the great fascination he had for her. She was\
continually tormented at the same time by remorse for having deserted\
Mitya, and in moments of discord and violent anger (and they were\
numerous) she told Ivan so plainly. This was what he had called to Alyosha\
\'93lies upon lies.\'94 There was, of course, much that was false in it, and\
that angered Ivan more than anything.... But of all this later.\
\
He did, in fact, for a time almost forget Smerdyakov\'92s existence, and yet,\
a fortnight after his first visit to him, he began to be haunted by the\
same strange thoughts as before. It\'92s enough to say that he was\
continually asking himself, why was it that on that last night in Fyodor\
Pavlovitch\'92s house he had crept out on to the stairs like a thief and\
listened to hear what his father was doing below? Why had he recalled that\
afterwards with repulsion? Why next morning, had he been suddenly so\
depressed on the journey? Why, as he reached Moscow, had he said to\
himself, \'93I am a scoundrel\'94? And now he almost fancied that these\
tormenting thoughts would make him even forget Katerina Ivanovna, so\
completely did they take possession of him again. It was just after\
fancying this, that he met Alyosha in the street. He stopped him at once,\
and put a question to him:\
\
\'93Do you remember when Dmitri burst in after dinner and beat father, and\
afterwards I told you in the yard that I reserved \'91the right to\
desire\'92?... Tell me, did you think then that I desired father\'92s death or\
not?\'94\
\
\'93I did think so,\'94 answered Alyosha, softly.\
\
\'93It was so, too; it was not a matter of guessing. But didn\'92t you fancy\
then that what I wished was just that \'91one reptile should devour another\'92;\
that is, just that Dmitri should kill father, and as soon as possible ...\
and that I myself was even prepared to help to bring that about?\'94\
\
Alyosha turned rather pale, and looked silently into his brother\'92s face.\
\
\'93Speak!\'94 cried Ivan, \'93I want above everything to know what you thought\
then. I want the truth, the truth!\'94\
\
He drew a deep breath, looking angrily at Alyosha before his answer came.\
\
\'93Forgive me, I did think that, too, at the time,\'94 whispered Alyosha, and\
he did not add one softening phrase.\
\
\'93Thanks,\'94 snapped Ivan, and, leaving Alyosha, he went quickly on his way.\
From that time Alyosha noticed that Ivan began obviously to avoid him and\
seemed even to have taken a dislike to him, so much so that Alyosha gave\
up going to see him. Immediately after that meeting with him, Ivan had not\
gone home, but went straight to Smerdyakov again.\
\
\
\
Chapter VII. The Second Visit To Smerdyakov\
\
\
By that time Smerdyakov had been discharged from the hospital. Ivan knew\
his new lodging, the dilapidated little wooden house, divided in two by a\
passage on one side of which lived Marya Kondratyevna and her mother, and\
on the other, Smerdyakov. No one knew on what terms he lived with them,\
whether as a friend or as a lodger. It was supposed afterwards that he had\
come to stay with them as Marya Kondratyevna\'92s betrothed, and was living\
there for a time without paying for board or lodging. Both mother and\
daughter had the greatest respect for him and looked upon him as greatly\
superior to themselves.\
\
Ivan knocked, and, on the door being opened, went straight into the\
passage. By Marya Kondratyevna\'92s directions he went straight to the better\
room on the left, occupied by Smerdyakov. There was a tiled stove in the\
room and it was extremely hot. The walls were gay with blue paper, which\
was a good deal used however, and in the cracks under it cockroaches\
swarmed in amazing numbers, so that there was a continual rustling from\
them. The furniture was very scanty: two benches against each wall and two\
chairs by the table. The table of plain wood was covered with a cloth with\
pink patterns on it. There was a pot of geranium on each of the two little\
windows. In the corner there was a case of ikons. On the table stood a\
little copper samovar with many dents in it, and a tray with two cups. But\
Smerdyakov had finished tea and the samovar was out. He was sitting at the\
table on a bench. He was looking at an exercise\uc0\u8208 book and slowly writing\
with a pen. There was a bottle of ink by him and a flat iron candlestick,\
but with a composite candle. Ivan saw at once from Smerdyakov\'92s face that\
he had completely recovered from his illness. His face was fresher,\
fuller, his hair stood up jauntily in front, and was plastered down at the\
sides. He was sitting in a parti\uc0\u8208 colored, wadded dressing\u8208 gown, rather\
dirty and frayed, however. He had spectacles on his nose, which Ivan had\
never seen him wearing before. This trifling circumstance suddenly\
redoubled Ivan\'92s anger: \'93A creature like that and wearing spectacles!\'94\
\
Smerdyakov slowly raised his head and looked intently at his visitor\
through his spectacles; then he slowly took them off and rose from the\
bench, but by no means respectfully, almost lazily, doing the least\
possible required by common civility. All this struck Ivan instantly; he\
took it all in and noted it at once\'97most of all the look in Smerdyakov\'92s\
eyes, positively malicious, churlish and haughty. \'93What do you want to\
intrude for?\'94 it seemed to say; \'93we settled everything then; why have you\
come again?\'94 Ivan could scarcely control himself.\
\
\'93It\'92s hot here,\'94 he said, still standing, and unbuttoned his overcoat.\
\
\'93Take off your coat,\'94 Smerdyakov conceded.\
\
Ivan took off his coat and threw it on a bench with trembling hands. He\
took a chair, moved it quickly to the table and sat down. Smerdyakov\
managed to sit down on his bench before him.\
\
\'93To begin with, are we alone?\'94 Ivan asked sternly and impulsively. \'93Can\
they overhear us in there?\'94\
\
\'93No one can hear anything. You\'92ve seen for yourself: there\'92s a passage.\'94\
\
\'93Listen, my good fellow; what was that you babbled, as I was leaving the\
hospital, that if I said nothing about your faculty of shamming fits, you\
wouldn\'92t tell the investigating lawyer all our conversation at the gate?\
What do you mean by _all_? What could you mean by it? Were you threatening\
me? Have I entered into some sort of compact with you? Do you suppose I am\
afraid of you?\'94\
\
Ivan said this in a perfect fury, giving him to understand with obvious\
intention that he scorned any subterfuge or indirectness and meant to show\
his cards. Smerdyakov\'92s eyes gleamed resentfully, his left eye winked, and\
he at once gave his answer, with his habitual composure and deliberation.\
\'93You want to have everything above\uc0\u8208 board; very well, you shall have it,\'94\
he seemed to say.\
\
\'93This is what I meant then, and this is why I said that, that you, knowing\
beforehand of this murder of your own parent, left him to his fate, and\
that people mightn\'92t after that conclude any evil about your feelings and\
perhaps of something else, too\'97that\'92s what I promised not to tell the\
authorities.\'94\
\
Though Smerdyakov spoke without haste and obviously controlling himself,\
yet there was something in his voice, determined and emphatic, resentful\
and insolently defiant. He stared impudently at Ivan. A mist passed before\
Ivan\'92s eyes for the first moment.\
\
\'93How? What? Are you out of your mind?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m perfectly in possession of all my faculties.\'94\
\
\'93Do you suppose I _knew_ of the murder?\'94 Ivan cried at last, and he\
brought his fist violently on the table. \'93What do you mean by \'91something\
else, too\'92? Speak, scoundrel!\'94\
\
Smerdyakov was silent and still scanned Ivan with the same insolent stare.\
\
\'93Speak, you stinking rogue, what is that \'91something else, too\'92?\'94\
\
\'93The \'91something else\'92 I meant was that you probably, too, were very\
desirous of your parent\'92s death.\'94\
\
Ivan jumped up and struck him with all his might on the shoulder, so that\
he fell back against the wall. In an instant his face was bathed in tears.\
Saying, \'93It\'92s a shame, sir, to strike a sick man,\'94 he dried his eyes with\
a very dirty blue check handkerchief and sank into quiet weeping. A minute\
passed.\
\
\'93That\'92s enough! Leave off,\'94 Ivan said peremptorily, sitting down again.\
\'93Don\'92t put me out of all patience.\'94\
\
Smerdyakov took the rag from his eyes. Every line of his puckered face\
reflected the insult he had just received.\
\
\'93So you thought then, you scoundrel, that together with Dmitri I meant to\
kill my father?\'94\
\
\'93I didn\'92t know what thoughts were in your mind then,\'94 said Smerdyakov\
resentfully; \'93and so I stopped you then at the gate to sound you on that\
very point.\'94\
\
\'93To sound what, what?\'94\
\
\'93Why, that very circumstance, whether you wanted your father to be\
murdered or not.\'94\
\
What infuriated Ivan more than anything was the aggressive, insolent tone\
to which Smerdyakov persistently adhered.\
\
\'93It was you murdered him?\'94 he cried suddenly.\
\
Smerdyakov smiled contemptuously.\
\
\'93You know of yourself, for a fact, that it wasn\'92t I murdered him. And I\
should have thought that there was no need for a sensible man to speak of\
it again.\'94\
\
\'93But why, why had you such a suspicion about me at the time?\'94\
\
\'93As you know already, it was simply from fear. For I was in such a\
position, shaking with fear, that I suspected every one. I resolved to\
sound you, too, for I thought if you wanted the same as your brother, then\
the business was as good as settled and I should be crushed like a fly,\
too.\'94\
\
\'93Look here, you didn\'92t say that a fortnight ago.\'94\
\
\'93I meant the same when I talked to you in the hospital, only I thought\
you\'92d understand without wasting words, and that being such a sensible man\
you wouldn\'92t care to talk of it openly.\'94\
\
\'93What next! Come answer, answer, I insist: what was it ... what could I\
have done to put such a degrading suspicion into your mean soul?\'94\
\
\'93As for the murder, you couldn\'92t have done that and didn\'92t want to, but as\
for wanting some one else to do it, that was just what you did want.\'94\
\
\'93And how coolly, how coolly he speaks! But why should I have wanted it;\
what grounds had I for wanting it?\'94\
\
\'93What grounds had you? What about the inheritance?\'94 said Smerdyakov\
sarcastically, and, as it were, vindictively. \'93Why, after your parent\'92s\
death there was at least forty thousand to come to each of you, and very\
likely more, but if Fyodor Pavlovitch got married then to that lady,\
Agrafena Alexandrovna, she would have had all his capital made over to her\
directly after the wedding, for she\'92s plenty of sense, so that your parent\
would not have left you two roubles between the three of you. And were\
they far from a wedding, either? Not a hair\'92s\uc0\u8208 breadth: that lady had only\
to lift her little finger and he would have run after her to church, with\
his tongue out.\'94\
\
Ivan restrained himself with painful effort.\
\
\'93Very good,\'94 he commented at last. \'93You see, I haven\'92t jumped up, I\
haven\'92t knocked you down, I haven\'92t killed you. Speak on. So, according to\
you, I had fixed on Dmitri to do it; I was reckoning on him?\'94\
\
\'93How could you help reckoning on him? If he killed him, then he would lose\
all the rights of a nobleman, his rank and property, and would go off to\
exile; so his share of the inheritance would come to you and your brother\
Alexey Fyodorovitch in equal parts; so you\'92d each have not forty, but\
sixty thousand each. There\'92s not a doubt you did reckon on Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch.\'94\
\
\'93What I put up with from you! Listen, scoundrel, if I had reckoned on any\
one then, it would have been on you, not on Dmitri, and I swear I did\
expect some wickedness from you ... at the time.... I remember my\
impression!\'94\
\
\'93I thought, too, for a minute, at the time, that you were reckoning on me\
as well,\'94 said Smerdyakov, with a sarcastic grin. \'93So that it was just by\
that more than anything you showed me what was in your mind. For if you\
had a foreboding about me and yet went away, you as good as said to me,\
\'91You can murder my parent, I won\'92t hinder you!\'92 \'94\
\
\'93You scoundrel! So that\'92s how you understood it!\'94\
\
\'93It was all that going to Tchermashnya. Why! You were meaning to go to\
Moscow and refused all your father\'92s entreaties to go to Tchermashnya\'97and\
simply at a foolish word from me you consented at once! What reason had\
you to consent to Tchermashnya? Since you went to Tchermashnya with no\
reason, simply at my word, it shows that you must have expected something\
from me.\'94\
\
\'93No, I swear I didn\'92t!\'94 shouted Ivan, grinding his teeth.\
\
\'93You didn\'92t? Then you ought, as your father\'92s son, to have had me taken to\
the lock\uc0\u8208 up and thrashed at once for my words then ... or at least, to\
have given me a punch in the face on the spot, but you were not a bit\
angry, if you please, and at once in a friendly way acted on my foolish\
word and went away, which was utterly absurd, for you ought to have stayed\
to save your parent\'92s life. How could I help drawing my conclusions?\'94\
\
Ivan sat scowling, both his fists convulsively pressed on his knees.\
\
\'93Yes, I am sorry I didn\'92t punch you in the face,\'94 he said with a bitter\
smile. \'93I couldn\'92t have taken you to the lock\uc0\u8208 up just then. Who would have\
believed me and what charge could I bring against you? But the punch in\
the face ... oh, I\'92m sorry I didn\'92t think of it. Though blows are\
forbidden, I should have pounded your ugly face to a jelly.\'94\
\
Smerdyakov looked at him almost with relish.\
\
\'93In the ordinary occasions of life,\'94 he said in the same complacent and\
sententious tone in which he had taunted Grigory and argued with him about\
religion at Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s table, \'93in the ordinary occasions of life,\
blows on the face are forbidden nowadays by law, and people have given\
them up, but in exceptional occasions of life people still fly to blows,\
not only among us but all over the world, be it even the fullest Republic\
of France, just as in the time of Adam and Eve, and they never will leave\
off, but you, even in an exceptional case, did not dare.\'94\
\
\'93What are you learning French words for?\'94 Ivan nodded towards the\
exercise\uc0\u8208 book lying on the table.\
\
\'93Why shouldn\'92t I learn them so as to improve my education, supposing that\
I may myself chance to go some day to those happy parts of Europe?\'94\
\
\'93Listen, monster.\'94 Ivan\'92s eyes flashed and he trembled all over. \'93I am not\
afraid of your accusations; you can say what you like about me, and if I\
don\'92t beat you to death, it\'92s simply because I suspect you of that crime\
and I\'92ll drag you to justice. I\'92ll unmask you.\'94\
\
\'93To my thinking, you\'92d better keep quiet, for what can you accuse me of,\
considering my absolute innocence? and who would believe you? Only if you\
begin, I shall tell everything, too, for I must defend myself.\'94\
\
\'93Do you think I am afraid of you now?\'94\
\
\'93If the court doesn\'92t believe all I\'92ve said to you just now, the public\
will, and you will be ashamed.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s as much as to say, \'91It\'92s always worth while speaking to a sensible\
man,\'92 eh?\'94 snarled Ivan.\
\
\'93You hit the mark, indeed. And you\'92d better be sensible.\'94\
\
Ivan got up, shaking all over with indignation, put on his coat, and\
without replying further to Smerdyakov, without even looking at him,\
walked quickly out of the cottage. The cool evening air refreshed him.\
There was a bright moon in the sky. A nightmare of ideas and sensations\
filled his soul. \'93Shall I go at once and give information against\
Smerdyakov? But what information can I give? He is not guilty, anyway. On\
the contrary, he\'92ll accuse me. And in fact, why did I set off for\
Tchermashnya then? What for? What for?\'94 Ivan asked himself. \'93Yes, of\
course, I was expecting something and he is right....\'94 And he remembered\
for the hundredth time how, on the last night in his father\'92s house, he\
had listened on the stairs. But he remembered it now with such anguish\
that he stood still on the spot as though he had been stabbed. \'93Yes, I\
expected it then, that\'92s true! I wanted the murder, I did want the murder!\
Did I want the murder? Did I want it? I must kill Smerdyakov! If I don\'92t\
dare kill Smerdyakov now, life is not worth living!\'94\
\
Ivan did not go home, but went straight to Katerina Ivanovna and alarmed\
her by his appearance. He was like a madman. He repeated all his\
conversation with Smerdyakov, every syllable of it. He couldn\'92t be calmed,\
however much she tried to soothe him: he kept walking about the room,\
speaking strangely, disconnectedly. At last he sat down, put his elbows on\
the table, leaned his head on his hands and pronounced this strange\
sentence: \'93If it\'92s not Dmitri, but Smerdyakov who\'92s the murderer, I share\
his guilt, for I put him up to it. Whether I did, I don\'92t know yet. But if\
he is the murderer, and not Dmitri, then, of course, I am the murderer,\
too.\'94\
\
When Katerina Ivanovna heard that, she got up from her seat without a\
word, went to her writing\uc0\u8208 table, opened a box standing on it, took out a\
sheet of paper and laid it before Ivan. This was the document of which\
Ivan spoke to Alyosha later on as a \'93conclusive proof\'94 that Dmitri had\
killed his father. It was the letter written by Mitya to Katerina Ivanovna\
when he was drunk, on the very evening he met Alyosha at the crossroads on\
the way to the monastery, after the scene at Katerina Ivanovna\'92s, when\
Grushenka had insulted her. Then, parting from Alyosha, Mitya had rushed\
to Grushenka. I don\'92t know whether he saw her, but in the evening he was\
at the \'93Metropolis,\'94 where he got thoroughly drunk. Then he asked for pen\
and paper and wrote a document of weighty consequences to himself. It was\
a wordy, disconnected, frantic letter, a drunken letter in fact. It was\
like the talk of a drunken man, who, on his return home, begins with\
extraordinary heat telling his wife or one of his household how he has\
just been insulted, what a rascal had just insulted him, what a fine\
fellow he is on the other hand, and how he will pay that scoundrel out;\
and all that at great length, with great excitement and incoherence, with\
drunken tears and blows on the table. The letter was written on a dirty\
piece of ordinary paper of the cheapest kind. It had been provided by the\
tavern and there were figures scrawled on the back of it. There was\
evidently not space enough for his drunken verbosity and Mitya not only\
filled the margins but had written the last line right across the rest.\
The letter ran as follows:\
\
\
    FATAL KATYA: To\uc0\u8208 morrow I will get the money and repay your three\
    thousand and farewell, woman of great wrath, but farewell, too, my\
    love! Let us make an end! To\uc0\u8208 morrow I shall try and get it from\
    every one, and if I can\'92t borrow it, I give you my word of honor I\
    shall go to my father and break his skull and take the money from\
    under the pillow, if only Ivan has gone. If I have to go to\
    Siberia for it, I\'92ll give you back your three thousand. And\
    farewell. I bow down to the ground before you, for I\'92ve been a\
    scoundrel to you. Forgive me! No, better not forgive me, you\'92ll be\
    happier and so shall I! Better Siberia than your love, for I love\
    another woman and you got to know her too well to\uc0\u8208 day, so how can\
    you forgive? I will murder the man who\'92s robbed me! I\'92ll leave you\
    all and go to the East so as to see no one again. Not _her_\
    either, for you are not my only tormentress; she is too. Farewell!\
\
    P.S.\'97I write my curse, but I adore you! I hear it in my heart. One\
    string is left, and it vibrates. Better tear my heart in two! I\
    shall kill myself, but first of all that cur. I shall tear three\
    thousand from him and fling it to you. Though I\'92ve been a\
    scoundrel to you, I am not a thief! You can expect three thousand.\
    The cur keeps it under his mattress, in pink ribbon. I am not a\
    thief, but I\'92ll murder my thief. Katya, don\'92t look disdainful.\
    Dmitri is not a thief! but a murderer! He has murdered his father\
    and ruined himself to hold his ground, rather than endure your\
    pride. And he doesn\'92t love you.\
\
    P.P.S.\'97I kiss your feet, farewell! P.P.P.S.\'97Katya, pray to God\
    that some one\'92ll give me the money. Then I shall not be steeped in\
    gore, and if no one does\'97I shall! Kill me!\
\
    Your slave and enemy,\
\
    D. KARAMAZOV.\
\
\
When Ivan read this \'93document\'94 he was convinced. So then it was his\
brother, not Smerdyakov. And if not Smerdyakov, then not he, Ivan. This\
letter at once assumed in his eyes the aspect of a logical proof. There\
could be no longer the slightest doubt of Mitya\'92s guilt. The suspicion\
never occurred to Ivan, by the way, that Mitya might have committed the\
murder in conjunction with Smerdyakov, and, indeed, such a theory did not\
fit in with the facts. Ivan was completely reassured. The next morning he\
only thought of Smerdyakov and his gibes with contempt. A few days later\
he positively wondered how he could have been so horribly distressed at\
his suspicions. He resolved to dismiss him with contempt and forget him.\
So passed a month. He made no further inquiry about Smerdyakov, but twice\
he happened to hear that he was very ill and out of his mind.\
\
\'93He\'92ll end in madness,\'94 the young doctor Varvinsky observed about him, and\
Ivan remembered this. During the last week of that month Ivan himself\
began to feel very ill. He went to consult the Moscow doctor who had been\
sent for by Katerina Ivanovna just before the trial. And just at that time\
his relations with Katerina Ivanovna became acutely strained. They were\
like two enemies in love with one another. Katerina Ivanovna\'92s \'93returns\'94\
to Mitya, that is, her brief but violent revulsions of feeling in his\
favor, drove Ivan to perfect frenzy. Strange to say, until that last scene\
described above, when Alyosha came from Mitya to Katerina Ivanovna, Ivan\
had never once, during that month, heard her express a doubt of Mitya\'92s\
guilt, in spite of those \'93returns\'94 that were so hateful to him. It is\
remarkable, too, that while he felt that he hated Mitya more and more\
every day, he realized that it was not on account of Katya\'92s \'93returns\'94\
that he hated him, but just _because he was the murderer of his father_.\
He was conscious of this and fully recognized it to himself.\
\
Nevertheless, he went to see Mitya ten days before the trial and proposed\
to him a plan of escape\'97a plan he had obviously thought over a long time.\
He was partly impelled to do this by a sore place still left in his heart\
from a phrase of Smerdyakov\'92s, that it was to his, Ivan\'92s, advantage that\
his brother should be convicted, as that would increase his inheritance\
and Alyosha\'92s from forty to sixty thousand roubles. He determined to\
sacrifice thirty thousand on arranging Mitya\'92s escape. On his return from\
seeing him, he was very mournful and dispirited; he suddenly began to feel\
that he was anxious for Mitya\'92s escape, not only to heal that sore place\
by sacrificing thirty thousand, but for another reason. \'93Is it because I\
am as much a murderer at heart?\'94 he asked himself. Something very deep\
down seemed burning and rankling in his soul. His pride above all suffered\
cruelly all that month. But of that later....\
\
When, after his conversation with Alyosha, Ivan suddenly decided with his\
hand on the bell of his lodging to go to Smerdyakov, he obeyed a sudden\
and peculiar impulse of indignation. He suddenly remembered how Katerina\
Ivanovna had only just cried out to him in Alyosha\'92s presence: \'93It was\
you, you, persuaded me of his\'94 (that is, Mitya\'92s) \'93guilt!\'94 Ivan was\
thunderstruck when he recalled it. He had never once tried to persuade her\
that Mitya was the murderer; on the contrary, he had suspected himself in\
her presence, that time when he came back from Smerdyakov. It was _she_,\
she, who had produced that \'93document\'94 and proved his brother\'92s guilt. And\
now she suddenly exclaimed: \'93I\'92ve been at Smerdyakov\'92s myself!\'94 When had\
she been there? Ivan had known nothing of it. So she was not at all so\
sure of Mitya\'92s guilt! And what could Smerdyakov have told her? What,\
what, had he said to her? His heart burned with violent anger. He could\
not understand how he could, half an hour before, have let those words\
pass and not have cried out at the moment. He let go of the bell and\
rushed off to Smerdyakov. \'93I shall kill him, perhaps, this time,\'94 he\
thought on the way.\
\
\
\
Chapter VIII. The Third And Last Interview With Smerdyakov\
\
\
When he was half\uc0\u8208 way there, the keen dry wind that had been blowing early\
that morning rose again, and a fine dry snow began falling thickly. It did\
not lie on the ground, but was whirled about by the wind, and soon there\
was a regular snowstorm. There were scarcely any lamp\uc0\u8208 posts in the part of\
the town where Smerdyakov lived. Ivan strode alone in the darkness,\
unconscious of the storm, instinctively picking out his way. His head\
ached and there was a painful throbbing in his temples. He felt that his\
hands were twitching convulsively. Not far from Marya Kondratyevna\'92s\
cottage, Ivan suddenly came upon a solitary drunken little peasant. He was\
wearing a coarse and patched coat, and was walking in zigzags, grumbling\
and swearing to himself. Then suddenly he would begin singing in a husky\
drunken voice:\
\
\
    \'93Ach, Vanka\'92s gone to Petersburg;\
    I won\'92t wait till he comes back.\'94\
\
\
But he broke off every time at the second line and began swearing again;\
then he would begin the same song again. Ivan felt an intense hatred for\
him before he had thought about him at all. Suddenly he realized his\
presence and felt an irresistible impulse to knock him down. At that\
moment they met, and the peasant with a violent lurch fell full tilt\
against Ivan, who pushed him back furiously. The peasant went flying\
backwards and fell like a log on the frozen ground. He uttered one\
plaintive \'93O\'97oh!\'94 and then was silent. Ivan stepped up to him. He was\
lying on his back, without movement or consciousness. \'93He will be frozen,\'94\
thought Ivan, and he went on his way to Smerdyakov\'92s.\
\
In the passage, Marya Kondratyevna, who ran out to open the door with a\
candle in her hand, whispered that Smerdyakov was very ill, \'93It\'92s not that\
he\'92s laid up, but he seems not himself, and he even told us to take the\
tea away; he wouldn\'92t have any.\'94\
\
\'93Why, does he make a row?\'94 asked Ivan coarsely.\
\
\'93Oh, dear, no, quite the contrary, he\'92s very quiet. Only please don\'92t talk\
to him too long,\'94 Marya Kondratyevna begged him. Ivan opened the door and\
stepped into the room.\
\
It was over\uc0\u8208 heated as before, but there were changes in the room. One of\
the benches at the side had been removed, and in its place had been put a\
large old mahogany leather sofa, on which a bed had been made up, with\
fairly clean white pillows. Smerdyakov was sitting on the sofa, wearing\
the same dressing\uc0\u8208 gown. The table had been brought out in front of the\
sofa, so that there was hardly room to move. On the table lay a thick book\
in yellow cover, but Smerdyakov was not reading it. He seemed to be\
sitting doing nothing. He met Ivan with a slow silent gaze, and was\
apparently not at all surprised at his coming. There was a great change in\
his face; he was much thinner and sallower. His eyes were sunken and there\
were blue marks under them.\
\
\'93Why, you really are ill?\'94 Ivan stopped short. \'93I won\'92t keep you long, I\
won\'92t even take off my coat. Where can one sit down?\'94\
\
He went to the other end of the table, moved up a chair and sat down on\
it.\
\
\'93Why do you look at me without speaking? I\'92ve only come with one question,\
and I swear I won\'92t go without an answer. Has the young lady, Katerina\
Ivanovna, been with you?\'94\
\
Smerdyakov still remained silent, looking quietly at Ivan as before.\
Suddenly, with a motion of his hand, he turned his face away.\
\
\'93What\'92s the matter with you?\'94 cried Ivan.\
\
\'93Nothing.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean by \'91nothing\'92?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, she has. It\'92s no matter to you. Let me alone.\'94\
\
\'93No, I won\'92t let you alone. Tell me, when was she here?\'94\
\
\'93Why, I\'92d quite forgotten about her,\'94 said Smerdyakov, with a scornful\
smile, and turning his face to Ivan again, he stared at him with a look of\
frenzied hatred, the same look that he had fixed on him at their last\
interview, a month before.\
\
\'93You seem very ill yourself, your face is sunken; you don\'92t look like\
yourself,\'94 he said to Ivan.\
\
\'93Never mind my health, tell me what I ask you.\'94\
\
\'93But why are your eyes so yellow? The whites are quite yellow. Are you so\
worried?\'94 He smiled contemptuously and suddenly laughed outright.\
\
\'93Listen; I\'92ve told you I won\'92t go away without an answer!\'94 Ivan cried,\
intensely irritated.\
\
\'93Why do you keep pestering me? Why do you torment me?\'94 said Smerdyakov,\
with a look of suffering.\
\
\'93Damn it! I\'92ve nothing to do with you. Just answer my question and I\'92ll go\
away.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve no answer to give you,\'94 said Smerdyakov, looking down again.\
\
\'93You may be sure I\'92ll make you answer!\'94\
\
\'93Why are you so uneasy?\'94 Smerdyakov stared at him, not simply with\
contempt, but almost with repulsion. \'93Is this because the trial begins to\uc0\u8208 \
morrow? Nothing will happen to you; can\'92t you believe that at last? Go\
home, go to bed and sleep in peace, don\'92t be afraid of anything.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t understand you.... What have I to be afraid of to\uc0\u8208 morrow?\'94 Ivan\
articulated in astonishment, and suddenly a chill breath of fear did in\
fact pass over his soul. Smerdyakov measured him with his eyes.\
\
\'93You don\'92t understand?\'94 he drawled reproachfully. \'93It\'92s a strange thing a\
sensible man should care to play such a farce!\'94\
\
Ivan looked at him speechless. The startling, incredibly supercilious tone\
of this man who had once been his valet, was extraordinary in itself. He\
had not taken such a tone even at their last interview.\
\
\'93I tell you, you\'92ve nothing to be afraid of. I won\'92t say anything about\
you; there\'92s no proof against you. I say, how your hands are trembling!\
Why are your fingers moving like that? Go home, _you_ did not murder him.\'94\
\
Ivan started. He remembered Alyosha.\
\
\'93I know it was not I,\'94 he faltered.\
\
\'93Do you?\'94 Smerdyakov caught him up again.\
\
Ivan jumped up and seized him by the shoulder.\
\
\'93Tell me everything, you viper! Tell me everything!\'94\
\
Smerdyakov was not in the least scared. He only riveted his eyes on Ivan\
with insane hatred.\
\
\'93Well, it was you who murdered him, if that\'92s it,\'94 he whispered furiously.\
\
Ivan sank back on his chair, as though pondering something. He laughed\
malignantly.\
\
\'93You mean my going away. What you talked about last time?\'94\
\
\'93You stood before me last time and understood it all, and you understand\
it now.\'94\
\
\'93All I understand is that you are mad.\'94\
\
\'93Aren\'92t you tired of it? Here we are face to face; what\'92s the use of going\
on keeping up a farce to each other? Are you still trying to throw it all\
on me, to my face? _You_ murdered him; you are the real murderer, I was\
only your instrument, your faithful servant, and it was following your\
words I did it.\'94\
\
\'93_Did_ it? Why, did you murder him?\'94 Ivan turned cold.\
\
Something seemed to give way in his brain, and he shuddered all over with\
a cold shiver. Then Smerdyakov himself looked at him wonderingly; probably\
the genuineness of Ivan\'92s horror struck him.\
\
\'93You don\'92t mean to say you really did not know?\'94 he faltered\
mistrustfully, looking with a forced smile into his eyes. Ivan still gazed\
at him, and seemed unable to speak.\
\
\
    Ach, Vanka\'92s gone to Petersburg;\
    I won\'92t wait till he comes back,\
\
\
suddenly echoed in his head.\
\
\'93Do you know, I am afraid that you are a dream, a phantom sitting before\
me,\'94 he muttered.\
\
\'93There\'92s no phantom here, but only us two and one other. No doubt he is\
here, that third, between us.\'94\
\
\'93Who is he? Who is here? What third person?\'94 Ivan cried in alarm, looking\
about him, his eyes hastily searching in every corner.\
\
\'93That third is God Himself\'97Providence. He is the third beside us now. Only\
don\'92t look for Him, you won\'92t find Him.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s a lie that you killed him!\'94 Ivan cried madly. \'93You are mad, or\
teasing me again!\'94\
\
Smerdyakov, as before, watched him curiously, with no sign of fear. He\
could still scarcely get over his incredulity; he still fancied that Ivan\
knew everything and was trying to \'93throw it all on him to his face.\'94\
\
\'93Wait a minute,\'94 he said at last in a weak voice, and suddenly bringing up\
his left leg from under the table, he began turning up his trouser leg. He\
was wearing long white stockings and slippers. Slowly he took off his\
garter and fumbled to the bottom of his stocking. Ivan gazed at him, and\
suddenly shuddered in a paroxysm of terror.\
\
\'93He\'92s mad!\'94 he cried, and rapidly jumping up, he drew back, so that he\
knocked his back against the wall and stood up against it, stiff and\
straight. He looked with insane terror at Smerdyakov, who, entirely\
unaffected by his terror, continued fumbling in his stocking, as though he\
were making an effort to get hold of something with his fingers and pull\
it out. At last he got hold of it and began pulling it out. Ivan saw that\
it was a piece of paper, or perhaps a roll of papers. Smerdyakov pulled it\
out and laid it on the table.\
\
\'93Here,\'94 he said quietly.\
\
\'93What is it?\'94 asked Ivan, trembling.\
\
\'93Kindly look at it,\'94 Smerdyakov answered, still in the same low tone.\
\
Ivan stepped up to the table, took up the roll of paper and began\
unfolding it, but suddenly he drew back his fingers, as though from\
contact with a loathsome reptile.\
\
\'93Your hands keep twitching,\'94 observed Smerdyakov, and he deliberately\
unfolded the bundle himself. Under the wrapper were three packets of\
hundred\uc0\u8208 rouble notes.\
\
\'93They are all here, all the three thousand roubles; you need not count\
them. Take them,\'94 Smerdyakov suggested to Ivan, nodding at the notes. Ivan\
sank back in his chair. He was as white as a handkerchief.\
\
\'93You frightened me ... with your stocking,\'94 he said, with a strange grin.\
\
\'93Can you really not have known till now?\'94 Smerdyakov asked once more.\
\
\'93No, I did not know. I kept thinking of Dmitri. Brother, brother! Ach!\'94 He\
suddenly clutched his head in both hands.\
\
\'93Listen. Did you kill him alone? With my brother\'92s help or without?\'94\
\
\'93It was only with you, with your help, I killed him, and Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch is quite innocent.\'94\
\
\'93All right, all right. Talk about me later. Why do I keep on trembling? I\
can\'92t speak properly.\'94\
\
\'93You were bold enough then. You said \'91everything was lawful,\'92 and how\
frightened you are now,\'94 Smerdyakov muttered in surprise. \'93Won\'92t you have\
some lemonade? I\'92ll ask for some at once. It\'92s very refreshing. Only I\
must hide this first.\'94\
\
And again he motioned at the notes. He was just going to get up and call\
at the door to Marya Kondratyevna to make some lemonade and bring it them,\
but, looking for something to cover up the notes that she might not see\
them, he first took out his handkerchief, and as it turned out to be very\
dirty, took up the big yellow book that Ivan had noticed at first lying on\
the table, and put it over the notes. The book was _The Sayings of the\
Holy Father Isaac the Syrian_. Ivan read it mechanically.\
\
\'93I won\'92t have any lemonade,\'94 he said. \'93Talk of me later. Sit down and tell\
me how you did it. Tell me all about it.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92d better take off your greatcoat, or you\'92ll be too hot.\'94 Ivan, as\
though he\'92d only just thought of it, took off his coat, and, without\
getting up from his chair, threw it on the bench.\
\
\'93Speak, please, speak.\'94\
\
He seemed calmer. He waited, feeling sure that Smerdyakov would tell him\
_all_ about it.\
\
\'93How it was done?\'94 sighed Smerdyakov. \'93It was done in a most natural way,\
following your very words.\'94\
\
\'93Of my words later,\'94 Ivan broke in again, apparently with complete self\uc0\u8208 \
possession, firmly uttering his words, and not shouting as before. \'93Only\
tell me in detail how you did it. Everything, as it happened. Don\'92t forget\
anything. The details, above everything, the details, I beg you.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92d gone away, then I fell into the cellar.\'94\
\
\'93In a fit or in a sham one?\'94\
\
\'93A sham one, naturally. I shammed it all. I went quietly down the steps to\
the very bottom and lay down quietly, and as I lay down I gave a scream,\
and struggled, till they carried me out.\'94\
\
\'93Stay! And were you shamming all along, afterwards, and in the hospital?\'94\
\
\'93No, not at all. Next day, in the morning, before they took me to the\
hospital, I had a real attack and a more violent one than I\'92ve had for\
years. For two days I was quite unconscious.\'94\
\
\'93All right, all right. Go on.\'94\
\
\'93They laid me on the bed. I knew I\'92d be the other side of the partition,\
for whenever I was ill, Marfa Ignatyevna used to put me there, near them.\
She\'92s always been very kind to me, from my birth up. At night I moaned,\
but quietly. I kept expecting Dmitri Fyodorovitch to come.\'94\
\
\'93Expecting him? To come to you?\'94\
\
\'93Not to me. I expected him to come into the house, for I\'92d no doubt that\
he\'92d come that night, for being without me and getting no news, he\'92d be\
sure to come and climb over the fence, as he used to, and do something.\'94\
\
\'93And if he hadn\'92t come?\'94\
\
\'93Then nothing would have happened. I should never have brought myself to\
it without him.\'94\
\
\'93All right, all right ... speak more intelligibly, don\'92t hurry; above all,\
don\'92t leave anything out!\'94\
\
\'93I expected him to kill Fyodor Pavlovitch. I thought that was certain, for\
I had prepared him for it ... during the last few days.... He knew about\
the knocks, that was the chief thing. With his suspiciousness and the fury\
which had been growing in him all those days, he was bound to get into the\
house by means of those taps. That was inevitable, so I was expecting\
him.\'94\
\
\'93Stay,\'94 Ivan interrupted; \'93if he had killed him, he would have taken the\
money and carried it away; you must have considered that. What would you\
have got by it afterwards? I don\'92t see.\'94\
\
\'93But he would never have found the money. That was only what I told him,\
that the money was under the mattress. But that wasn\'92t true. It had been\
lying in a box. And afterwards I suggested to Fyodor Pavlovitch, as I was\
the only person he trusted, to hide the envelope with the notes in the\
corner behind the ikons, for no one would have guessed that place,\
especially if they came in a hurry. So that\'92s where the envelope lay, in\
the corner behind the ikons. It would have been absurd to keep it under\
the mattress; the box, anyway, could be locked. But all believe it was\
under the mattress. A stupid thing to believe. So if Dmitri Fyodorovitch\
had committed the murder, finding nothing, he would either have run away\
in a hurry, afraid of every sound, as always happens with murderers, or he\
would have been arrested. So I could always have clambered up to the ikons\
and have taken away the money next morning or even that night, and it\
would have all been put down to Dmitri Fyodorovitch. I could reckon upon\
that.\'94\
\
\'93But what if he did not kill him, but only knocked him down?\'94\
\
\'93If he did not kill him, of course, I would not have ventured to take the\
money, and nothing would have happened. But I calculated that he would\
beat him senseless, and I should have time to take it then, and then I\'92d\
make out to Fyodor Pavlovitch that it was no one but Dmitri Fyodorovitch\
who had taken the money after beating him.\'94\
\
\'93Stop ... I am getting mixed. Then it was Dmitri after all who killed him;\
you only took the money?\'94\
\
\'93No, he didn\'92t kill him. Well, I might as well have told you now that he\
was the murderer.... But I don\'92t want to lie to you now, because ...\
because if you really haven\'92t understood till now, as I see for myself,\
and are not pretending, so as to throw your guilt on me to my very face,\
you are still responsible for it all, since you knew of the murder and\
charged me to do it, and went away knowing all about it. And so I want to\
prove to your face this evening that you are the only real murderer in the\
whole affair, and I am not the real murderer, though I did kill him. You\
are the rightful murderer.\'94\
\
\'93Why, why, am I a murderer? Oh, God!\'94 Ivan cried, unable to restrain\
himself at last, and forgetting that he had put off discussing himself\
till the end of the conversation. \'93You still mean that Tchermashnya? Stay,\
tell me, why did you want my consent, if you really took Tchermashnya for\
consent? How will you explain that now?\'94\
\
\'93Assured of your consent, I should have known that you wouldn\'92t have made\
an outcry over those three thousand being lost, even if I\'92d been\
suspected, instead of Dmitri Fyodorovitch, or as his accomplice; on the\
contrary, you would have protected me from others.... And when you got\
your inheritance you would have rewarded me when you were able, all the\
rest of your life. For you\'92d have received your inheritance through me,\
seeing that if he had married Agrafena Alexandrovna, you wouldn\'92t have had\
a farthing.\'94\
\
\'93Ah! Then you intended to worry me all my life afterwards,\'94 snarled Ivan.\
\'93And what if I hadn\'92t gone away then, but had informed against you?\'94\
\
\'93What could you have informed? That I persuaded you to go to Tchermashnya?\
That\'92s all nonsense. Besides, after our conversation you would either have\
gone away or have stayed. If you had stayed, nothing would have happened.\
I should have known that you didn\'92t want it done, and should have\
attempted nothing. As you went away, it meant you assured me that you\
wouldn\'92t dare to inform against me at the trial, and that you\'92d overlook\
my having the three thousand. And, indeed, you couldn\'92t have prosecuted me\
afterwards, because then I should have told it all in the court; that is,\
not that I had stolen the money or killed him\'97I shouldn\'92t have said\
that\'97but that you\'92d put me up to the theft and the murder, though I didn\'92t\
consent to it. That\'92s why I needed your consent, so that you couldn\'92t have\
cornered me afterwards, for what proof could you have had? I could always\
have cornered you, revealing your eagerness for your father\'92s death, and I\
tell you the public would have believed it all, and you would have been\
ashamed for the rest of your life.\'94\
\
\'93Was I then so eager, was I?\'94 Ivan snarled again.\
\
\'93To be sure you were, and by your consent you silently sanctioned my doing\
it.\'94 Smerdyakov looked resolutely at Ivan. He was very weak and spoke\
slowly and wearily, but some hidden inner force urged him on. He evidently\
had some design. Ivan felt that.\
\
\'93Go on,\'94 he said. \'93Tell me what happened that night.\'94\
\
\'93What more is there to tell! I lay there and I thought I heard the master\
shout. And before that Grigory Vassilyevitch had suddenly got up and came\
out, and he suddenly gave a scream, and then all was silence and darkness.\
I lay there waiting, my heart beating; I couldn\'92t bear it. I got up at\
last, went out. I saw the window open on the left into the garden, and I\
stepped to the left to listen whether he was sitting there alive, and I\
heard the master moving about, sighing, so I knew he was alive. \'91Ech!\'92 I\
thought. I went to the window and shouted to the master, \'91It\'92s I.\'92 And he\
shouted to me, \'91He\'92s been, he\'92s been; he\'92s run away.\'92 He meant Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch had been. \'91He\'92s killed Grigory!\'92 \'91Where?\'92 I whispered.\
\'91There, in the corner,\'92 he pointed. He was whispering, too. \'91Wait a bit,\'92\
I said. I went to the corner of the garden to look, and there I came upon\
Grigory Vassilyevitch lying by the wall, covered with blood, senseless. So\
it\'92s true that Dmitri Fyodorovitch has been here, was the thought that\
came into my head, and I determined on the spot to make an end of it, as\
Grigory Vassilyevitch, even if he were alive, would see nothing of it, as\
he lay there senseless. The only risk was that Marfa Ignatyevna might wake\
up. I felt that at the moment, but the longing to get it done came over\
me, till I could scarcely breathe. I went back to the window to the master\
and said, \'91She\'92s here, she\'92s come; Agrafena Alexandrovna has come, wants\
to be let in.\'92 And he started like a baby. \'91Where is she?\'92 he fairly\
gasped, but couldn\'92t believe it. \'91She\'92s standing there,\'92 said I. \'91Open.\'92\
He looked out of the window at me, half believing and half distrustful,\
but afraid to open. \'91Why, he is afraid of me now,\'92 I thought. And it was\
funny. I bethought me to knock on the window\uc0\u8208 frame those taps we\'92d agreed\
upon as a signal that Grushenka had come, in his presence, before his\
eyes. He didn\'92t seem to believe my word, but as soon as he heard the taps,\
he ran at once to open the door. He opened it. I would have gone in, but\
he stood in the way to prevent me passing. \'91Where is she? Where is she?\'92\
He looked at me, all of a tremble. \'91Well,\'92 thought I, \'91if he\'92s so\
frightened of me as all that, it\'92s a bad look out!\'92 And my legs went weak\
with fright that he wouldn\'92t let me in or would call out, or Marfa\
Ignatyevna would run up, or something else might happen. I don\'92t remember\
now, but I must have stood pale, facing him. I whispered to him, \'91Why,\
she\'92s there, there, under the window; how is it you don\'92t see her?\'92 I\
said. \'91Bring her then, bring her.\'92 \'91She\'92s afraid,\'92 said I; \'91she was\
frightened at the noise, she\'92s hidden in the bushes; go and call to her\
yourself from the study.\'92 He ran to the window, put the candle in the\
window. \'91Grushenka,\'92 he cried, \'91Grushenka, are you here?\'92 Though he cried\
that, he didn\'92t want to lean out of the window, he didn\'92t want to move\
away from me, for he was panic\uc0\u8208 stricken; he was so frightened he didn\'92t\
dare to turn his back on me. \'91Why, here she is,\'92 said I. I went up to the\
window and leaned right out of it. \'91Here she is; she\'92s in the bush,\
laughing at you, don\'92t you see her?\'92 He suddenly believed it; he was all\
of a shake\'97he was awfully crazy about her\'97and he leaned right out of the\
window. I snatched up that iron paper\uc0\u8208 weight from his table; do you\
remember, weighing about three pounds? I swung it and hit him on the top\
of the skull with the corner of it. He didn\'92t even cry out. He only sank\
down suddenly, and I hit him again and a third time. And the third time I\
knew I\'92d broken his skull. He suddenly rolled on his back, face upwards,\
covered with blood. I looked round. There was no blood on me, not a spot.\
I wiped the paper\uc0\u8208 weight, put it back, went up to the ikons, took the\
money out of the envelope, and flung the envelope on the floor and the\
pink ribbon beside it. I went out into the garden all of a tremble,\
straight to the apple\uc0\u8208 tree with a hollow in it\'97you know that hollow. I\'92d\
marked it long before and put a rag and a piece of paper ready in it. I\
wrapped all the notes in the rag and stuffed it deep down in the hole. And\
there it stayed for over a fortnight. I took it out later, when I came out\
of the hospital. I went back to my bed, lay down and thought, \'91If Grigory\
Vassilyevitch has been killed outright it may be a bad job for me, but if\
he is not killed and recovers, it will be first\uc0\u8208 rate, for then he\'92ll bear\
witness that Dmitri Fyodorovitch has been here, and so he must have killed\
him and taken the money.\'92 Then I began groaning with suspense and\
impatience, so as to wake Marfa Ignatyevna as soon as possible. At last\
she got up and she rushed to me, but when she saw Grigory Vassilyevitch\
was not there, she ran out, and I heard her scream in the garden. And that\
set it all going and set my mind at rest.\'94\
\
He stopped. Ivan had listened all the time in dead silence without\
stirring or taking his eyes off him. As he told his story Smerdyakov\
glanced at him from time to time, but for the most part kept his eyes\
averted. When he had finished he was evidently agitated and was breathing\
hard. The perspiration stood out on his face. But it was impossible to\
tell whether it was remorse he was feeling, or what.\
\
\'93Stay,\'94 cried Ivan, pondering. \'93What about the door? If he only opened the\
door to you, how could Grigory have seen it open before? For Grigory saw\
it before you went.\'94\
\
It was remarkable that Ivan spoke quite amicably, in a different tone, not\
angry as before, so if any one had opened the door at that moment and\
peeped in at them, he would certainly have concluded that they were\
talking peaceably about some ordinary, though interesting, subject.\
\
\'93As for that door and Grigory Vassilyevitch\'92s having seen it open, that\'92s\
only his fancy,\'94 said Smerdyakov, with a wry smile. \'93He is not a man, I\
assure you, but an obstinate mule. He didn\'92t see it, but fancied he had\
seen it, and there\'92s no shaking him. It\'92s just our luck he took that\
notion into his head, for they can\'92t fail to convict Dmitri Fyodorovitch\
after that.\'94\
\
\'93Listen ...\'94 said Ivan, beginning to seem bewildered again and making an\
effort to grasp something. \'93Listen. There are a lot of questions I want to\
ask you, but I forget them ... I keep forgetting and getting mixed up.\
Yes. Tell me this at least, why did you open the envelope and leave it\
there on the floor? Why didn\'92t you simply carry off the envelope?... When\
you were telling me, I thought you spoke about it as though it were the\
right thing to do ... but why, I can\'92t understand....\'94\
\
\'93I did that for a good reason. For if a man had known all about it, as I\
did for instance, if he\'92d seen those notes before, and perhaps had put\
them in that envelope himself, and had seen the envelope sealed up and\
addressed, with his own eyes, if such a man had done the murder, what\
should have made him tear open the envelope afterwards, especially in such\
desperate haste, since he\'92d know for certain the notes must be in the\
envelope? No, if the robber had been some one like me, he\'92d simply have\
put the envelope straight in his pocket and got away with it as fast as he\
could. But it\'92d be quite different with Dmitri Fyodorovitch. He only knew\
about the envelope by hearsay; he had never seen it, and if he\'92d found it,\
for instance, under the mattress, he\'92d have torn it open as quickly as\
possible to make sure the notes were in it. And he\'92d have thrown the\
envelope down, without having time to think that it would be evidence\
against him. Because he was not an habitual thief and had never directly\
stolen anything before, for he is a gentleman born, and if he did bring\
himself to steal, it would not be regular stealing, but simply taking what\
was his own, for he\'92d told the whole town he meant to before, and had even\
bragged aloud before every one that he\'92d go and take his property from\
Fyodor Pavlovitch. I didn\'92t say that openly to the prosecutor when I was\
being examined, but quite the contrary, I brought him to it by a hint, as\
though I didn\'92t see it myself, and as though he\'92d thought of it himself\
and I hadn\'92t prompted him; so that Mr. Prosecutor\'92s mouth positively\
watered at my suggestion.\'94\
\
\'93But can you possibly have thought of all that on the spot?\'94 cried Ivan,\
overcome with astonishment. He looked at Smerdyakov again with alarm.\
\
\'93Mercy on us! Could any one think of it all in such a desperate hurry? It\
was all thought out beforehand.\'94\
\
\'93Well ... well, it was the devil helped you!\'94 Ivan cried again. \'93No, you\
are not a fool, you are far cleverer than I thought....\'94\
\
He got up, obviously intending to walk across the room. He was in terrible\
distress. But as the table blocked his way, and there was hardly room to\
pass between the table and the wall, he only turned round where he stood\
and sat down again. Perhaps the impossibility of moving irritated him, as\
he suddenly cried out almost as furiously as before.\
\
\'93Listen, you miserable, contemptible creature! Don\'92t you understand that\
if I haven\'92t killed you, it\'92s simply because I am keeping you to answer\
to\uc0\u8208 morrow at the trial. God sees,\'94 Ivan raised his hand, \'93perhaps I, too,\
was guilty; perhaps I really had a secret desire for my father\'92s ...\
death, but I swear I was not as guilty as you think, and perhaps I didn\'92t\
urge you on at all. No, no, I didn\'92t urge you on! But no matter, I will\
give evidence against myself to\uc0\u8208 morrow at the trial. I\'92m determined to! I\
shall tell everything, everything. But we\'92ll make our appearance together.\
And whatever you may say against me at the trial, whatever evidence you\
give, I\'92ll face it; I am not afraid of you. I\'92ll confirm it all myself!\
But you must confess, too! You must, you must; we\'92ll go together. That\'92s\
how it shall be!\'94\
\
Ivan said this solemnly and resolutely and from his flashing eyes alone it\
could be seen that it would be so.\
\
\'93You are ill, I see; you are quite ill. Your eyes are yellow,\'94 Smerdyakov\
commented, without the least irony, with apparent sympathy in fact.\
\
\'93We\'92ll go together,\'94 Ivan repeated. \'93And if you won\'92t go, no matter, I\'92ll\
go alone.\'94\
\
Smerdyakov paused as though pondering.\
\
\'93There\'92ll be nothing of the sort, and you won\'92t go,\'94 he concluded at last\
positively.\
\
\'93You don\'92t understand me,\'94 Ivan exclaimed reproachfully.\
\
\'93You\'92ll be too much ashamed, if you confess it all. And, what\'92s more, it\
will be no use at all, for I shall say straight out that I never said\
anything of the sort to you, and that you are either ill (and it looks\
like it, too), or that you\'92re so sorry for your brother that you are\
sacrificing yourself to save him and have invented it all against me, for\
you\'92ve always thought no more of me than if I\'92d been a fly. And who will\
believe you, and what single proof have you got?\'94\
\
\'93Listen, you showed me those notes just now to convince me.\'94\
\
Smerdyakov lifted the book off the notes and laid it on one side.\
\
\'93Take that money away with you,\'94 Smerdyakov sighed.\
\
\'93Of course, I shall take it. But why do you give it to me, if you\
committed the murder for the sake of it?\'94 Ivan looked at him with great\
surprise.\
\
\'93I don\'92t want it,\'94 Smerdyakov articulated in a shaking voice, with a\
gesture of refusal. \'93I did have an idea of beginning a new life with that\
money in Moscow or, better still, abroad. I did dream of it, chiefly\
because \'91all things are lawful.\'92 That was quite right what you taught me,\
for you talked a lot to me about that. For if there\'92s no everlasting God,\
there\'92s no such thing as virtue, and there\'92s no need of it. You were right\
there. So that\'92s how I looked at it.\'94\
\
\'93Did you come to that of yourself?\'94 asked Ivan, with a wry smile.\
\
\'93With your guidance.\'94\
\
\'93And now, I suppose, you believe in God, since you are giving back the\
money?\'94\
\
\'93No, I don\'92t believe,\'94 whispered Smerdyakov.\
\
\'93Then why are you giving it back?\'94\
\
\'93Leave off ... that\'92s enough!\'94 Smerdyakov waved his hand again. \'93You used\
to say yourself that everything was lawful, so now why are you so upset,\
too? You even want to go and give evidence against yourself.... Only\
there\'92ll be nothing of the sort! You won\'92t go to give evidence,\'94\
Smerdyakov decided with conviction.\
\
\'93You\'92ll see,\'94 said Ivan.\
\
\'93It isn\'92t possible. You are very clever. You are fond of money, I know\
that. You like to be respected, too, for you\'92re very proud; you are far\
too fond of female charms, too, and you mind most of all about living in\
undisturbed comfort, without having to depend on any one\'97that\'92s what you\
care most about. You won\'92t want to spoil your life for ever by taking such\
a disgrace on yourself. You are like Fyodor Pavlovitch, you are more like\
him than any of his children; you\'92ve the same soul as he had.\'94\
\
\'93You are not a fool,\'94 said Ivan, seeming struck. The blood rushed to his\
face. \'93You are serious now!\'94 he observed, looking suddenly at Smerdyakov\
with a different expression.\
\
\'93It was your pride made you think I was a fool. Take the money.\'94\
\
Ivan took the three rolls of notes and put them in his pocket without\
wrapping them in anything.\
\
\'93I shall show them at the court to\uc0\u8208 morrow,\'94 he said.\
\
\'93Nobody will believe you, as you\'92ve plenty of money of your own; you may\
simply have taken it out of your cash\uc0\u8208 box and brought it to the court.\'94\
\
Ivan rose from his seat.\
\
\'93I repeat,\'94 he said, \'93the only reason I haven\'92t killed you is that I need\
you for to\uc0\u8208 morrow, remember that, don\'92t forget it!\'94\
\
\'93Well, kill me. Kill me now,\'94 Smerdyakov said, all at once looking\
strangely at Ivan. \'93You won\'92t dare do that even!\'94 he added, with a bitter\
smile. \'93You won\'92t dare to do anything, you, who used to be so bold!\'94\
\
\'93Till to\uc0\u8208 morrow,\'94 cried Ivan, and moved to go out.\
\
\'93Stay a moment.... Show me those notes again.\'94\
\
Ivan took out the notes and showed them to him. Smerdyakov looked at them\
for ten seconds.\
\
\'93Well, you can go,\'94 he said, with a wave of his hand. \'93Ivan Fyodorovitch!\'94\
he called after him again.\
\
\'93What do you want?\'94 Ivan turned without stopping.\
\
\'93Good\uc0\u8208 by!\'94\
\
\'93Till to\uc0\u8208 morrow!\'94 Ivan cried again, and he walked out of the cottage.\
\
The snowstorm was still raging. He walked the first few steps boldly, but\
suddenly began staggering. \'93It\'92s something physical,\'94 he thought with a\
grin. Something like joy was springing up in his heart. He was conscious\
of unbounded resolution; he would make an end of the wavering that had so\
tortured him of late. His determination was taken, \'93and now it will not be\
changed,\'94 he thought with relief. At that moment he stumbled against\
something and almost fell down. Stopping short, he made out at his feet\
the peasant he had knocked down, still lying senseless and motionless. The\
snow had almost covered his face. Ivan seized him and lifted him in his\
arms. Seeing a light in the little house to the right he went up, knocked\
at the shutters, and asked the man to whom the house belonged to help him\
carry the peasant to the police\uc0\u8208 station, promising him three roubles. The\
man got ready and came out. I won\'92t describe in detail how Ivan succeeded\
in his object, bringing the peasant to the police\uc0\u8208 station and arranging\
for a doctor to see him at once, providing with a liberal hand for the\
expenses. I will only say that this business took a whole hour, but Ivan\
was well content with it. His mind wandered and worked incessantly.\
\
\'93If I had not taken my decision so firmly for to\uc0\u8208 morrow,\'94 he reflected\
with satisfaction, \'93I should not have stayed a whole hour to look after\
the peasant, but should have passed by, without caring about his being\
frozen. I am quite capable of watching myself, by the way,\'94 he thought at\
the same instant, with still greater satisfaction, \'93although they have\
decided that I am going out of my mind!\'94\
\
Just as he reached his own house he stopped short, asking himself suddenly\
hadn\'92t he better go at once to the prosecutor and tell him everything. He\
decided the question by turning back to the house. \'93Everything together\
to\uc0\u8208 morrow!\'94 he whispered to himself, and, strange to say, almost all his\
gladness and self\uc0\u8208 satisfaction passed in one instant.\
\
As he entered his own room he felt something like a touch of ice on his\
heart, like a recollection or, more exactly, a reminder, of something\
agonizing and revolting that was in that room now, at that moment, and had\
been there before. He sank wearily on his sofa. The old woman brought him\
a samovar; he made tea, but did not touch it. He sat on the sofa and felt\
giddy. He felt that he was ill and helpless. He was beginning to drop\
asleep, but got up uneasily and walked across the room to shake off his\
drowsiness. At moments he fancied he was delirious, but it was not illness\
that he thought of most. Sitting down again, he began looking round, as\
though searching for something. This happened several times. At last his\
eyes were fastened intently on one point. Ivan smiled, but an angry flush\
suffused his face. He sat a long time in his place, his head propped on\
both arms, though he looked sideways at the same point, at the sofa that\
stood against the opposite wall. There was evidently something, some\
object, that irritated him there, worried him and tormented him.\
\
\
\
Chapter IX. The Devil. Ivan\'92s Nightmare\
\
\
I am not a doctor, but yet I feel that the moment has come when I must\
inevitably give the reader some account of the nature of Ivan\'92s illness.\
Anticipating events I can say at least one thing: he was at that moment on\
the very eve of an attack of brain fever. Though his health had long been\
affected, it had offered a stubborn resistance to the fever which in the\
end gained complete mastery over it. Though I know nothing of medicine, I\
venture to hazard the suggestion that he really had perhaps, by a terrible\
effort of will, succeeded in delaying the attack for a time, hoping, of\
course, to check it completely. He knew that he was unwell, but he loathed\
the thought of being ill at that fatal time, at the approaching crisis in\
his life, when he needed to have all his wits about him, to say what he\
had to say boldly and resolutely and \'93to justify himself to himself.\'94\
\
He had, however, consulted the new doctor, who had been brought from\
Moscow by a fantastic notion of Katerina Ivanovna\'92s to which I have\
referred already. After listening to him and examining him the doctor came\
to the conclusion that he was actually suffering from some disorder of the\
brain, and was not at all surprised by an admission which Ivan had\
reluctantly made him. \'93Hallucinations are quite likely in your condition,\'94\
the doctor opined, \'93though it would be better to verify them ... you must\
take steps at once, without a moment\'92s delay, or things will go badly with\
you.\'94 But Ivan did not follow this judicious advice and did not take to\
his bed to be nursed. \'93I am walking about, so I am strong enough, if I\
drop, it\'92ll be different then, any one may nurse me who likes,\'94 he\
decided, dismissing the subject.\
\
And so he was sitting almost conscious himself of his delirium and, as I\
have said already, looking persistently at some object on the sofa against\
the opposite wall. Some one appeared to be sitting there, though goodness\
knows how he had come in, for he had not been in the room when Ivan came\
into it, on his return from Smerdyakov. This was a person or, more\
accurately speaking, a Russian gentleman of a particular kind, no longer\
young, _qui faisait la cinquantaine_, as the French say, with rather long,\
still thick, dark hair, slightly streaked with gray and a small pointed\
beard. He was wearing a brownish reefer jacket, rather shabby, evidently\
made by a good tailor though, and of a fashion at least three years old,\
that had been discarded by smart and well\uc0\u8208 to\u8208 do people for the last two\
years. His linen and his long scarf\uc0\u8208 like neck\u8208 tie were all such as are\
worn by people who aim at being stylish, but on closer inspection his\
linen was not over\uc0\u8208 clean and his wide scarf was very threadbare. The\
visitor\'92s check trousers were of excellent cut, but were too light in\
color and too tight for the present fashion. His soft fluffy white hat was\
out of keeping with the season.\
\
In brief there was every appearance of gentility on straitened means. It\
looked as though the gentleman belonged to that class of idle landowners\
who used to flourish in the times of serfdom. He had unmistakably been, at\
some time, in good and fashionable society, had once had good connections,\
had possibly preserved them indeed, but, after a gay youth, becoming\
gradually impoverished on the abolition of serfdom, he had sunk into the\
position of a poor relation of the best class, wandering from one good old\
friend to another and received by them for his companionable and\
accommodating disposition and as being, after all, a gentleman who could\
be asked to sit down with any one, though, of course, not in a place of\
honor. Such gentlemen of accommodating temper and dependent position, who\
can tell a story, take a hand at cards, and who have a distinct aversion\
for any duties that may be forced upon them, are usually solitary\
creatures, either bachelors or widowers. Sometimes they have children, but\
if so, the children are always being brought up at a distance, at some\
aunt\'92s, to whom these gentlemen never allude in good society, seeming\
ashamed of the relationship. They gradually lose sight of their children\
altogether, though at intervals they receive a birthday or Christmas\
letter from them and sometimes even answer it.\
\
The countenance of the unexpected visitor was not so much good\uc0\u8208 natured, as\
accommodating and ready to assume any amiable expression as occasion might\
arise. He had no watch, but he had a tortoise\uc0\u8208 shell lorgnette on a black\
ribbon. On the middle finger of his right hand was a massive gold ring\
with a cheap opal stone in it.\
\
Ivan was angrily silent and would not begin the conversation. The visitor\
waited and sat exactly like a poor relation who had come down from his\
room to keep his host company at tea, and was discreetly silent, seeing\
that his host was frowning and preoccupied. But he was ready for any\
affable conversation as soon as his host should begin it. All at once his\
face expressed a sudden solicitude.\
\
\'93I say,\'94 he began to Ivan, \'93excuse me, I only mention it to remind you.\
You went to Smerdyakov\'92s to find out about Katerina Ivanovna, but you came\
away without finding out anything about her, you probably forgot\'97\'94\
\
\'93Ah, yes,\'94 broke from Ivan and his face grew gloomy with uneasiness. \'93Yes,\
I\'92d forgotten ... but it doesn\'92t matter now, never mind, till to\uc0\u8208 morrow,\'94\
he muttered to himself, \'93and you,\'94 he added, addressing his visitor, \'93I\
should have remembered that myself in a minute, for that was just what was\
tormenting me! Why do you interfere, as if I should believe that you\
prompted me, and that I didn\'92t remember it of myself?\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t believe it then,\'94 said the gentleman, smiling amicably, \'93what\'92s the\
good of believing against your will? Besides, proofs are no help to\
believing, especially material proofs. Thomas believed, not because he saw\
Christ risen, but because he wanted to believe, before he saw. Look at the\
spiritualists, for instance.... I am very fond of them ... only fancy,\
they imagine that they are serving the cause of religion, because the\
devils show them their horns from the other world. That, they say, is a\
material proof, so to speak, of the existence of another world. The other\
world and material proofs, what next! And if you come to that, does\
proving there\'92s a devil prove that there\'92s a God? I want to join an\
idealist society, I\'92ll lead the opposition in it, I\'92ll say I am a realist,\
but not a materialist, he he!\'94\
\
\'93Listen,\'94 Ivan suddenly got up from the table. \'93I seem to be delirious....\
I am delirious, in fact, talk any nonsense you like, I don\'92t care! You\
won\'92t drive me to fury, as you did last time. But I feel somehow\
ashamed.... I want to walk about the room.... I sometimes don\'92t see you\
and don\'92t even hear your voice as I did last time, but I always guess what\
you are prating, for it\'92s I, _I myself speaking, not you_. Only I don\'92t\
know whether I was dreaming last time or whether I really saw you. I\'92ll\
wet a towel and put it on my head and perhaps you\'92ll vanish into air.\'94\
\
Ivan went into the corner, took a towel, and did as he said, and with a\
wet towel on his head began walking up and down the room.\
\
\'93I am so glad you treat me so familiarly,\'94 the visitor began.\
\
\'93Fool,\'94 laughed Ivan, \'93do you suppose I should stand on ceremony with you?\
I am in good spirits now, though I\'92ve a pain in my forehead ... and in the\
top of my head ... only please don\'92t talk philosophy, as you did last\
time. If you can\'92t take yourself off, talk of something amusing. Talk\
gossip, you are a poor relation, you ought to talk gossip. What a\
nightmare to have! But I am not afraid of you. I\'92ll get the better of you.\
I won\'92t be taken to a mad\uc0\u8208 house!\'94\
\
\'93_C\'92est charmant_, poor relation. Yes, I am in my natural shape. For what\
am I on earth but a poor relation? By the way, I am listening to you and\
am rather surprised to find you are actually beginning to take me for\
something real, not simply your fancy, as you persisted in declaring last\
time\'97\'94\
\
\'93Never for one minute have I taken you for reality,\'94 Ivan cried with a\
sort of fury. \'93You are a lie, you are my illness, you are a phantom. It\'92s\
only that I don\'92t know how to destroy you and I see I must suffer for a\
time. You are my hallucination. You are the incarnation of myself, but\
only of one side of me ... of my thoughts and feelings, but only the\
nastiest and stupidest of them. From that point of view you might be of\
interest to me, if only I had time to waste on you\'97\'94\
\
\'93Excuse me, excuse me, I\'92ll catch you. When you flew out at Alyosha under\
the lamp\uc0\u8208 post this evening and shouted to him, \'91You learnt it from _him_!\
How do you know that _he_ visits me?\'92 you were thinking of me then. So for\
one brief moment you did believe that I really exist,\'94 the gentleman\
laughed blandly.\
\
\'93Yes, that was a moment of weakness ... but I couldn\'92t believe in you. I\
don\'92t know whether I was asleep or awake last time. Perhaps I was only\
dreaming then and didn\'92t see you really at all\'97\'94\
\
\'93And why were you so surly with Alyosha just now? He is a dear; I\'92ve\
treated him badly over Father Zossima.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t talk of Alyosha! How dare you, you flunkey!\'94 Ivan laughed again.\
\
\'93You scold me, but you laugh\'97that\'92s a good sign. But you are ever so much\
more polite than you were last time and I know why: that great resolution\
of yours\'97\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t speak of my resolution,\'94 cried Ivan, savagely.\
\
\'93I understand, I understand, _c\'92est noble, c\'92est charmant_, you are going\
to defend your brother and to sacrifice yourself ... _C\'92est\
chevaleresque_.\'94\
\
\'93Hold your tongue, I\'92ll kick you!\'94\
\
\'93I shan\'92t be altogether sorry, for then my object will be attained. If you\
kick me, you must believe in my reality, for people don\'92t kick ghosts.\
Joking apart, it doesn\'92t matter to me, scold if you like, though it\'92s\
better to be a trifle more polite even to me. \'91Fool, flunkey!\'92 what\
words!\'94\
\
\'93Scolding you, I scold myself,\'94 Ivan laughed again, \'93you are myself,\
myself, only with a different face. You just say what I am thinking ...\
and are incapable of saying anything new!\'94\
\
\'93If I am like you in my way of thinking, it\'92s all to my credit,\'94 the\
gentleman declared, with delicacy and dignity.\
\
\'93You choose out only my worst thoughts, and what\'92s more, the stupid ones.\
You are stupid and vulgar. You are awfully stupid. No, I can\'92t put up with\
you! What am I to do, what am I to do?\'94 Ivan said through his clenched\
teeth.\
\
\'93My dear friend, above all things I want to behave like a gentleman and to\
be recognized as such,\'94 the visitor began in an excess of deprecating and\
simple\uc0\u8208 hearted pride, typical of a poor relation. \'93I am poor, but ... I\
won\'92t say very honest, but ... it\'92s an axiom generally accepted in society\
that I am a fallen angel. I certainly can\'92t conceive how I can ever have\
been an angel. If I ever was, it must have been so long ago that there\'92s\
no harm in forgetting it. Now I only prize the reputation of being a\
gentlemanly person and live as I can, trying to make myself agreeable. I\
love men genuinely, I\'92ve been greatly calumniated! Here when I stay with\
you from time to time, my life gains a kind of reality and that\'92s what I\
like most of all. You see, like you, I suffer from the fantastic and so I\
love the realism of earth. Here, with you, everything is circumscribed,\
here all is formulated and geometrical, while we have nothing but\
indeterminate equations! I wander about here dreaming. I like dreaming.\
Besides, on earth I become superstitious. Please don\'92t laugh, that\'92s just\
what I like, to become superstitious. I adopt all your habits here: I\'92ve\
grown fond of going to the public baths, would you believe it? and I go\
and steam myself with merchants and priests. What I dream of is becoming\
incarnate once for all and irrevocably in the form of some merchant\'92s wife\
weighing eighteen stone, and of believing all she believes. My ideal is to\
go to church and offer a candle in simple\uc0\u8208 hearted faith, upon my word it\
is. Then there would be an end to my sufferings. I like being doctored\
too; in the spring there was an outbreak of smallpox and I went and was\
vaccinated in a foundling hospital\'97if only you knew how I enjoyed myself\
that day. I subscribed ten roubles in the cause of the Slavs!... But you\
are not listening. Do you know, you are not at all well this evening? I\
know you went yesterday to that doctor ... well, what about your health?\
What did the doctor say?\'94\
\
\'93Fool!\'94 Ivan snapped out.\
\
\'93But you are clever, anyway. You are scolding again? I didn\'92t ask out of\
sympathy. You needn\'92t answer. Now rheumatism has come in again\'97\'94\
\
\'93Fool!\'94 repeated Ivan.\
\
\'93You keep saying the same thing; but I had such an attack of rheumatism\
last year that I remember it to this day.\'94\
\
\'93The devil have rheumatism!\'94\
\
\'93Why not, if I sometimes put on fleshly form? I put on fleshly form and I\
take the consequences. Satan _sum et nihil humanum a me alienum puto_.\'94\
\
\'93What, what, Satan _sum et nihil humanum_ ... that\'92s not bad for the\
devil!\'94\
\
\'93I am glad I\'92ve pleased you at last.\'94\
\
\'93But you didn\'92t get that from me.\'94 Ivan stopped suddenly, seeming struck.\
\'93That never entered my head, that\'92s strange.\'94\
\
\'93_C\'92est du nouveau, n\'92est\uc0\u8208 ce pas?_ This time I\'92ll act honestly and explain\
to you. Listen, in dreams and especially in nightmares, from indigestion\
or anything, a man sees sometimes such artistic visions, such complex and\
real actuality, such events, even a whole world of events, woven into such\
a plot, with such unexpected details from the most exalted matters to the\
last button on a cuff, as I swear Leo Tolstoy has never invented. Yet such\
dreams are sometimes seen not by writers, but by the most ordinary people,\
officials, journalists, priests.... The subject is a complete enigma. A\
statesman confessed to me, indeed, that all his best ideas came to him\
when he was asleep. Well, that\'92s how it is now, though I am your\
hallucination, yet just as in a nightmare, I say original things which had\
not entered your head before. So I don\'92t repeat your ideas, yet I am only\
your nightmare, nothing more.\'94\
\
\'93You are lying, your aim is to convince me you exist apart and are not my\
nightmare, and now you are asserting you are a dream.\'94\
\
\'93My dear fellow, I\'92ve adopted a special method to\uc0\u8208 day, I\'92ll explain it to\
you afterwards. Stay, where did I break off? Oh, yes! I caught cold then,\
only not here but yonder.\'94\
\
\'93Where is yonder? Tell me, will you be here long? Can\'92t you go away?\'94 Ivan\
exclaimed almost in despair. He ceased walking to and fro, sat down on the\
sofa, leaned his elbows on the table again and held his head tight in both\
hands. He pulled the wet towel off and flung it away in vexation. It was\
evidently of no use.\
\
\'93Your nerves are out of order,\'94 observed the gentleman, with a carelessly\
easy, though perfectly polite, air. \'93You are angry with me even for being\
able to catch cold, though it happened in a most natural way. I was\
hurrying then to a diplomatic _soir\'e9e_ at the house of a lady of high rank\
in Petersburg, who was aiming at influence in the Ministry. Well, an\
evening suit, white tie, gloves, though I was God knows where and had to\
fly through space to reach your earth.... Of course, it took only an\
instant, but you know a ray of light from the sun takes full eight\
minutes, and fancy in an evening suit and open waistcoat. Spirits don\'92t\
freeze, but when one\'92s in fleshly form, well ... in brief, I didn\'92t think,\
and set off, and you know in those ethereal spaces, in the water that is\
above the firmament, there\'92s such a frost ... at least one can\'92t call it\
frost, you can fancy, 150 degrees below zero! You know the game the\
village girls play\'97they invite the unwary to lick an ax in thirty degrees\
of frost, the tongue instantly freezes to it and the dupe tears the skin\
off, so it bleeds. But that\'92s only in 30 degrees, in 150 degrees I imagine\
it would be enough to put your finger on the ax and it would be the end of\
it ... if only there could be an ax there.\'94\
\
\'93And can there be an ax there?\'94 Ivan interrupted, carelessly and\
disdainfully. He was exerting himself to the utmost not to believe in the\
delusion and not to sink into complete insanity.\
\
\'93An ax?\'94 the guest interrupted in surprise.\
\
\'93Yes, what would become of an ax there?\'94 Ivan cried suddenly, with a sort\
of savage and insistent obstinacy.\
\
\'93What would become of an ax in space? _Quelle id\'e9e!_ If it were to fall to\
any distance, it would begin, I think, flying round the earth without\
knowing why, like a satellite. The astronomers would calculate the rising\
and the setting of the ax, _Gatzuk_ would put it in his calendar, that\'92s\
all.\'94\
\
\'93You are stupid, awfully stupid,\'94 said Ivan peevishly. \'93Fib more cleverly\
or I won\'92t listen. You want to get the better of me by realism, to\
convince me that you exist, but I don\'92t want to believe you exist! I won\'92t\
believe it!\'94\
\
\'93But I am not fibbing, it\'92s all the truth; the truth is unhappily hardly\
ever amusing. I see you persist in expecting something big of me, and\
perhaps something fine. That\'92s a great pity, for I only give what I can\'97\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t talk philosophy, you ass!\'94\
\
\'93Philosophy, indeed, when all my right side is numb and I am moaning and\
groaning. I\'92ve tried all the medical faculty: they can diagnose\
beautifully, they have the whole of your disease at their finger\uc0\u8208 tips, but\
they\'92ve no idea how to cure you. There was an enthusiastic little student\
here, \'91You may die,\'92 said he, \'91but you\'92ll know perfectly what disease you\
are dying of!\'92 And then what a way they have sending people to\
specialists! \'91We only diagnose,\'92 they say, \'91but go to such\uc0\u8208 and\u8208 such a\
specialist, he\'92ll cure you.\'92 The old doctor who used to cure all sorts of\
disease has completely disappeared, I assure you, now there are only\
specialists and they all advertise in the newspapers. If anything is wrong\
with your nose, they send you to Paris: there, they say, is a European\
specialist who cures noses. If you go to Paris, he\'92ll look at your nose; I\
can only cure your right nostril, he\'92ll tell you, for I don\'92t cure the\
left nostril, that\'92s not my speciality, but go to Vienna, there there\'92s a\
specialist who will cure your left nostril. What are you to do? I fell\
back on popular remedies, a German doctor advised me to rub myself with\
honey and salt in the bath\uc0\u8208 house. Solely to get an extra bath I went,\
smeared myself all over and it did me no good at all. In despair I wrote\
to Count Mattei in Milan. He sent me a book and some drops, bless him,\
and, only fancy, Hoff\'92s malt extract cured me! I bought it by accident,\
drank a bottle and a half of it, and I was ready to dance, it took it away\
completely. I made up my mind to write to the papers to thank him, I was\
prompted by a feeling of gratitude, and only fancy, it led to no end of a\
bother: not a single paper would take my letter. \'91It would be very\
reactionary,\'92 they said, \'91no one will believe it. _Le diable n\'92existe\
point._ You\'92d better remain anonymous,\'92 they advised me. What use is a\
letter of thanks if it\'92s anonymous? I laughed with the men at the\
newspaper office; \'91It\'92s reactionary to believe in God in our days,\'92 I\
said, \'91but I am the devil, so I may be believed in.\'92 \'91We quite understand\
that,\'92 they said. \'91Who doesn\'92t believe in the devil? Yet it won\'92t do, it\
might injure our reputation. As a joke, if you like.\'92 But I thought as a\
joke it wouldn\'92t be very witty. So it wasn\'92t printed. And do you know, I\
have felt sore about it to this day. My best feelings, gratitude, for\
instance, are literally denied me simply from my social position.\'94\
\
\'93Philosophical reflections again?\'94 Ivan snarled malignantly.\
\
\'93God preserve me from it, but one can\'92t help complaining sometimes. I am a\
slandered man. You upbraid me every moment with being stupid. One can see\
you are young. My dear fellow, intelligence isn\'92t the only thing! I have\
naturally a kind and merry heart. \'91I also write vaudevilles of all sorts.\'92\
You seem to take me for Hlestakov grown old, but my fate is a far more\
serious one. Before time was, by some decree which I could never make out,\
I was pre\uc0\u8208 destined \'91to deny\'92 and yet I am genuinely good\u8208 hearted and not\
at all inclined to negation. \'91No, you must go and deny, without denial\
there\'92s no criticism and what would a journal be without a column of\
criticism?\'92 Without criticism it would be nothing but one \'91hosannah.\'92 But\
nothing but hosannah is not enough for life, the hosannah must be tried in\
the crucible of doubt and so on, in the same style. But I don\'92t meddle in\
that, I didn\'92t create it, I am not answerable for it. Well, they\'92ve chosen\
their scapegoat, they\'92ve made me write the column of criticism and so life\
was made possible. We understand that comedy; I, for instance, simply ask\
for annihilation. No, live, I am told, for there\'92d be nothing without you.\
If everything in the universe were sensible, nothing would happen. There\
would be no events without you, and there must be events. So against the\
grain I serve to produce events and do what\'92s irrational because I am\
commanded to. For all their indisputable intelligence, men take this farce\
as something serious, and that is their tragedy. They suffer, of course\
... but then they live, they live a real life, not a fantastic one, for\
suffering is life. Without suffering what would be the pleasure of it? It\
would be transformed into an endless church service; it would be holy, but\
tedious. But what about me? I suffer, but still, I don\'92t live. I am x in\
an indeterminate equation. I am a sort of phantom in life who has lost all\
beginning and end, and who has even forgotten his own name. You are\
laughing\'97 no, you are not laughing, you are angry again. You are for ever\
angry, all you care about is intelligence, but I repeat again that I would\
give away all this super\uc0\u8208 stellar life, all the ranks and honors, simply to\
be transformed into the soul of a merchant\'92s wife weighing eighteen stone\
and set candles at God\'92s shrine.\'94\
\
\'93Then even you don\'92t believe in God?\'94 said Ivan, with a smile of hatred.\
\
\'93What can I say?\'97that is, if you are in earnest\'97\'94\
\
\'93Is there a God or not?\'94 Ivan cried with the same savage intensity.\
\
\'93Ah, then you are in earnest! My dear fellow, upon my word I don\'92t know.\
There! I\'92ve said it now!\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t know, but you see God? No, you are not some one apart, you are\
myself, you are I and nothing more! You are rubbish, you are my fancy!\'94\
\
\'93Well, if you like, I have the same philosophy as you, that would be true.\
_Je pense, donc je suis_, I know that for a fact; all the rest, all these\
worlds, God and even Satan\'97all that is not proved, to my mind. Does all\
that exist of itself, or is it only an emanation of myself, a logical\
development of my ego which alone has existed for ever: but I make haste\
to stop, for I believe you will be jumping up to beat me directly.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92d better tell me some anecdote!\'94 said Ivan miserably.\
\
\'93There is an anecdote precisely on our subject, or rather a legend, not an\
anecdote. You reproach me with unbelief, you see, you say, yet you don\'92t\
believe. But, my dear fellow, I am not the only one like that. We are all\
in a muddle over there now and all through your science. Once there used\
to be atoms, five senses, four elements, and then everything hung together\
somehow. There were atoms in the ancient world even, but since we\'92ve\
learned that you\'92ve discovered the chemical molecule and protoplasm and\
the devil knows what, we had to lower our crest. There\'92s a regular muddle,\
and, above all, superstition, scandal; there\'92s as much scandal among us as\
among you, you know; a little more in fact, and spying, indeed, for we\
have our secret police department where private information is received.\
Well, this wild legend belongs to our middle ages\'97not yours, but ours\'97and\
no one believes it even among us, except the old ladies of eighteen stone,\
not your old ladies I mean, but ours. We\'92ve everything you have, I am\
revealing one of our secrets out of friendship for you; though it\'92s\
forbidden. This legend is about Paradise. There was, they say, here on\
earth a thinker and philosopher. He rejected everything, \'91laws,\
conscience, faith,\'92 and, above all, the future life. He died; he expected\
to go straight to darkness and death and he found a future life before\
him. He was astounded and indignant. \'91This is against my principles!\'92 he\
said. And he was punished for that ... that is, you must excuse me, I am\
just repeating what I heard myself, it\'92s only a legend ... he was\
sentenced to walk a quadrillion kilometers in the dark (we\'92ve adopted the\
metric system, you know) and when he has finished that quadrillion, the\
gates of heaven would be opened to him and he\'92ll be forgiven\'97\'94\
\
\'93And what tortures have you in the other world besides the quadrillion\
kilometers?\'94 asked Ivan, with a strange eagerness.\
\
\'93What tortures? Ah, don\'92t ask. In old days we had all sorts, but now they\
have taken chiefly to moral punishments\'97\'91the stings of conscience\'92 and all\
that nonsense. We got that, too, from you, from the softening of your\
manners. And who\'92s the better for it? Only those who have got no\
conscience, for how can they be tortured by conscience when they have\
none? But decent people who have conscience and a sense of honor suffer\
for it. Reforms, when the ground has not been prepared for them,\
especially if they are institutions copied from abroad, do nothing but\
mischief! The ancient fire was better. Well, this man, who was condemned\
to the quadrillion kilometers, stood still, looked round and lay down\
across the road. \'91I won\'92t go, I refuse on principle!\'92 Take the soul of an\
enlightened Russian atheist and mix it with the soul of the prophet Jonah,\
who sulked for three days and nights in the belly of the whale, and you\
get the character of that thinker who lay across the road.\'94\
\
\'93What did he lie on there?\'94\
\
\'93Well, I suppose there was something to lie on. You are not laughing?\'94\
\
\'93Bravo!\'94 cried Ivan, still with the same strange eagerness. Now he was\
listening with an unexpected curiosity. \'93Well, is he lying there now?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s the point, that he isn\'92t. He lay there almost a thousand years and\
then he got up and went on.\'94\
\
\'93What an ass!\'94 cried Ivan, laughing nervously and still seeming to be\
pondering something intently. \'93Does it make any difference whether he lies\
there for ever or walks the quadrillion kilometers? It would take a\
billion years to walk it?\'94\
\
\'93Much more than that. I haven\'92t got a pencil and paper or I could work it\
out. But he got there long ago, and that\'92s where the story begins.\'94\
\
\'93What, he got there? But how did he get the billion years to do it?\'94\
\
\'93Why, you keep thinking of our present earth! But our present earth may\
have been repeated a billion times. Why, it\'92s become extinct, been frozen;\
cracked, broken to bits, disintegrated into its elements, again \'91the water\
above the firmament,\'92 then again a comet, again a sun, again from the sun\
it becomes earth\'97and the same sequence may have been repeated endlessly\
and exactly the same to every detail, most unseemly and insufferably\
tedious\'97\'94\
\
\'93Well, well, what happened when he arrived?\'94\
\
\'93Why, the moment the gates of Paradise were open and he walked in, before\
he had been there two seconds, by his watch (though to my thinking his\
watch must have long dissolved into its elements on the way), he cried out\
that those two seconds were worth walking not a quadrillion kilometers but\
a quadrillion of quadrillions, raised to the quadrillionth power! In fact,\
he sang \'91hosannah\'92 and overdid it so, that some persons there of lofty\
ideas wouldn\'92t shake hands with him at first\'97he\'92d become too rapidly\
reactionary, they said. The Russian temperament. I repeat, it\'92s a legend.\
I give it for what it\'92s worth. So that\'92s the sort of ideas we have on such\
subjects even now.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve caught you!\'94 Ivan cried, with an almost childish delight, as though\
he had succeeded in remembering something at last. \'93That anecdote about\
the quadrillion years, I made up myself! I was seventeen then, I was at\
the high school. I made up that anecdote and told it to a schoolfellow\
called Korovkin, it was at Moscow.... The anecdote is so characteristic\
that I couldn\'92t have taken it from anywhere. I thought I\'92d forgotten it\
... but I\'92ve unconsciously recalled it\'97I recalled it myself\'97it was not you\
telling it! Thousands of things are unconsciously remembered like that\
even when people are being taken to execution ... it\'92s come back to me in\
a dream. You are that dream! You are a dream, not a living creature!\'94\
\
\'93From the vehemence with which you deny my existence,\'94 laughed the\
gentleman, \'93I am convinced that you believe in me.\'94\
\
\'93Not in the slightest! I haven\'92t a hundredth part of a grain of faith in\
you!\'94\
\
\'93But you have the thousandth of a grain. Homeopathic doses perhaps are the\
strongest. Confess that you have faith even to the ten\uc0\u8208 thousandth of a\
grain.\'94\
\
\'93Not for one minute,\'94 cried Ivan furiously. \'93But I should like to believe\
in you,\'94 he added strangely.\
\
\'93Aha! There\'92s an admission! But I am good\uc0\u8208 natured. I\'92ll come to your\
assistance again. Listen, it was I caught you, not you me. I told you your\
anecdote you\'92d forgotten, on purpose, so as to destroy your faith in me\
completely.\'94\
\
\'93You are lying. The object of your visit is to convince me of your\
existence!\'94\
\
\'93Just so. But hesitation, suspense, conflict between belief and\
disbelief\'97is sometimes such torture to a conscientious man, such as you\
are, that it\'92s better to hang oneself at once. Knowing that you are\
inclined to believe in me, I administered some disbelief by telling you\
that anecdote. I lead you to belief and disbelief by turns, and I have my\
motive in it. It\'92s the new method. As soon as you disbelieve in me\
completely, you\'92ll begin assuring me to my face that I am not a dream but\
a reality. I know you. Then I shall have attained my object, which is an\
honorable one. I shall sow in you only a tiny grain of faith and it will\
grow into an oak\uc0\u8208 tree\'97and such an oak\u8208 tree that, sitting on it, you will\
long to enter the ranks of \'91the hermits in the wilderness and the saintly\
women,\'92 for that is what you are secretly longing for. You\'92ll dine on\
locusts, you\'92ll wander into the wilderness to save your soul!\'94\
\
\'93Then it\'92s for the salvation of my soul you are working, is it, you\
scoundrel?\'94\
\
\'93One must do a good work sometimes. How ill\uc0\u8208 humored you are!\'94\
\
\'93Fool! did you ever tempt those holy men who ate locusts and prayed\
seventeen years in the wilderness till they were overgrown with moss?\'94\
\
\'93My dear fellow, I\'92ve done nothing else. One forgets the whole world and\
all the worlds, and sticks to one such saint, because he is a very\
precious diamond. One such soul, you know, is sometimes worth a whole\
constellation. We have our system of reckoning, you know. The conquest is\
priceless! And some of them, on my word, are not inferior to you in\
culture, though you won\'92t believe it. They can contemplate such depths of\
belief and disbelief at the same moment that sometimes it really seems\
that they are within a hair\'92s\uc0\u8208 breadth of being \'91turned upside down,\'92 as\
the actor Gorbunov says.\'94\
\
\'93Well, did you get your nose pulled?\'94(8)\
\
\'93My dear fellow,\'94 observed the visitor sententiously, \'93it\'92s better to get\
off with your nose pulled than without a nose at all. As an afflicted\
marquis observed not long ago (he must have been treated by a specialist)\
in confession to his spiritual father\'97a Jesuit. I was present, it was\
simply charming. \'91Give me back my nose!\'92 he said, and he beat his breast.\
\'91My son,\'92 said the priest evasively, \'91all things are accomplished in\
accordance with the inscrutable decrees of Providence, and what seems a\
misfortune sometimes leads to extraordinary, though unapparent, benefits.\
If stern destiny has deprived you of your nose, it\'92s to your advantage\
that no one can ever pull you by your nose.\'92 \'91Holy father, that\'92s no\
comfort,\'92 cried the despairing marquis. \'91I\'92d be delighted to have my nose\
pulled every day of my life, if it were only in its proper place.\'92 \'91My\
son,\'92 sighs the priest, \'91you can\'92t expect every blessing at once. This is\
murmuring against Providence, who even in this has not forgotten you, for\
if you repine as you repined just now, declaring you\'92d be glad to have\
your nose pulled for the rest of your life, your desire has already been\
fulfilled indirectly, for when you lost your nose, you were led by the\
nose.\'92 \'94\
\
\'93Fool, how stupid!\'94 cried Ivan.\
\
\'93My dear friend, I only wanted to amuse you. But I swear that\'92s the\
genuine Jesuit casuistry and I swear that it all happened word for word as\
I\'92ve told you. It happened lately and gave me a great deal of trouble. The\
unhappy young man shot himself that very night when he got home. I was by\
his side till the very last moment. Those Jesuit confessionals are really\
my most delightful diversion at melancholy moments. Here\'92s another\
incident that happened only the other day. A little blonde Norman girl of\
twenty\'97a buxom, unsophisticated beauty that would make your mouth\
water\'97comes to an old priest. She bends down and whispers her sin into the\
grating. \'91Why, my daughter, have you fallen again already?\'92 cries the\
priest. \'91O Sancta Maria, what do I hear! Not the same man this time, how\
long is this going on? Aren\'92t you ashamed!\'92 \'91_Ah, mon p\'e8re_,\'92 answers the\
sinner with tears of penitence, \'91_\'e7a lui fait tant de plaisir, et \'e0 moi si\
peu de peine!_\'92 Fancy, such an answer! I drew back. It was the cry of\
nature, better than innocence itself, if you like. I absolved her sin on\
the spot and was turning to go, but I was forced to turn back. I heard the\
priest at the grating making an appointment with her for the\
evening\'97though he was an old man hard as flint, he fell in an instant! It\
was nature, the truth of nature asserted its rights! What, you are turning\
up your nose again? Angry again? I don\'92t know how to please you\'97\'94\
\
\'93Leave me alone, you are beating on my brain like a haunting nightmare,\'94\
Ivan moaned miserably, helpless before his apparition. \'93I am bored with\
you, agonizingly and insufferably. I would give anything to be able to\
shake you off!\'94\
\
\'93I repeat, moderate your expectations, don\'92t demand of me \'91everything\
great and noble\'92 and you\'92ll see how well we shall get on,\'94 said the\
gentleman impressively. \'93You are really angry with me for not having\
appeared to you in a red glow, with thunder and lightning, with scorched\
wings, but have shown myself in such a modest form. You are wounded, in\
the first place, in your esthetic feelings, and, secondly, in your pride.\
How could such a vulgar devil visit such a great man as you! Yes, there is\
that romantic strain in you, that was so derided by Byelinsky. I can\'92t\
help it, young man, as I got ready to come to you I did think as a joke of\
appearing in the figure of a retired general who had served in the\
Caucasus, with a star of the Lion and the Sun on my coat. But I was\
positively afraid of doing it, for you\'92d have thrashed me for daring to\
pin the Lion and the Sun on my coat, instead of, at least, the Polar Star\
or the Sirius. And you keep on saying I am stupid, but, mercy on us! I\
make no claim to be equal to you in intelligence. Mephistopheles declared\
to Faust that he desired evil, but did only good. Well, he can say what he\
likes, it\'92s quite the opposite with me. I am perhaps the one man in all\
creation who loves the truth and genuinely desires good. I was there when\
the Word, Who died on the Cross, rose up into heaven bearing on His bosom\
the soul of the penitent thief. I heard the glad shrieks of the cherubim\
singing and shouting hosannah and the thunderous rapture of the seraphim\
which shook heaven and all creation, and I swear to you by all that\'92s\
sacred, I longed to join the choir and shout hosannah with them all. The\
word had almost escaped me, had almost broken from my lips ... you know\
how susceptible and esthetically impressionable I am. But common sense\'97oh,\
a most unhappy trait in my character\'97kept me in due bounds and I let the\
moment pass! For what would have happened, I reflected, what would have\
happened after my hosannah? Everything on earth would have been\
extinguished at once and no events could have occurred. And so, solely\
from a sense of duty and my social position, I was forced to suppress the\
good moment and to stick to my nasty task. Somebody takes all the credit\
of what\'92s good for Himself, and nothing but nastiness is left for me. But\
I don\'92t envy the honor of a life of idle imposture, I am not ambitious.\
Why am I, of all creatures in the world, doomed to be cursed by all decent\
people and even to be kicked, for if I put on mortal form I am bound to\
take such consequences sometimes? I know, of course, there\'92s a secret in\
it, but they won\'92t tell me the secret for anything, for then perhaps,\
seeing the meaning of it, I might bawl hosannah, and the indispensable\
minus would disappear at once, and good sense would reign supreme\
throughout the whole world. And that, of course, would mean the end of\
everything, even of magazines and newspapers, for who would take them in?\
I know that at the end of all things I shall be reconciled. I, too, shall\
walk my quadrillion and learn the secret. But till that happens I am\
sulking and fulfill my destiny though it\'92s against the grain\'97that is, to\
ruin thousands for the sake of saving one. How many souls have had to be\
ruined and how many honorable reputations destroyed for the sake of that\
one righteous man, Job, over whom they made such a fool of me in old days!\
Yes, till the secret is revealed, there are two sorts of truths for\
me\'97one, their truth, yonder, which I know nothing about so far, and the\
other my own. And there\'92s no knowing which will turn out the better....\
Are you asleep?\'94\
\
\'93I might well be,\'94 Ivan groaned angrily. \'93All my stupid ideas\'97outgrown,\
thrashed out long ago, and flung aside like a dead carcass\'97you present to\
me as something new!\'94\
\
\'93There\'92s no pleasing you! And I thought I should fascinate you by my\
literary style. That hosannah in the skies really wasn\'92t bad, was it? And\
then that ironical tone _\'e0 la_ Heine, eh?\'94\
\
\'93No, I was never such a flunkey! How then could my soul beget a flunkey\
like you?\'94\
\
\'93My dear fellow, I know a most charming and attractive young Russian\
gentleman, a young thinker and a great lover of literature and art, the\
author of a promising poem entitled _The Grand Inquisitor_. I was only\
thinking of him!\'94\
\
\'93I forbid you to speak of _The Grand Inquisitor_,\'94 cried Ivan, crimson\
with shame.\
\
\'93And the _Geological Cataclysm_. Do you remember? That was a poem, now!\'94\
\
\'93Hold your tongue, or I\'92ll kill you!\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ll kill me? No, excuse me, I will speak. I came to treat myself to\
that pleasure. Oh, I love the dreams of my ardent young friends, quivering\
with eagerness for life! \'91There are new men,\'92 you decided last spring,\
when you were meaning to come here, \'91they propose to destroy everything\
and begin with cannibalism. Stupid fellows! they didn\'92t ask my advice! I\
maintain that nothing need be destroyed, that we only need to destroy the\
idea of God in man, that\'92s how we have to set to work. It\'92s that, that we\
must begin with. Oh, blind race of men who have no understanding! As soon\
as men have all of them denied God\'97and I believe that period, analogous\
with geological periods, will come to pass\'97the old conception of the\
universe will fall of itself without cannibalism, and, what\'92s more, the\
old morality, and everything will begin anew. Men will unite to take from\
life all it can give, but only for joy and happiness in the present world.\
Man will be lifted up with a spirit of divine Titanic pride and the man\uc0\u8208 \
god will appear. From hour to hour extending his conquest of nature\
infinitely by his will and his science, man will feel such lofty joy from\
hour to hour in doing it that it will make up for all his old dreams of\
the joys of heaven. Every one will know that he is mortal and will accept\
death proudly and serenely like a god. His pride will teach him that it\'92s\
useless for him to repine at life\'92s being a moment, and he will love his\
brother without need of reward. Love will be sufficient only for a moment\
of life, but the very consciousness of its momentariness will intensify\
its fire, which now is dissipated in dreams of eternal love beyond the\
grave\'92... and so on and so on in the same style. Charming!\'94\
\
Ivan sat with his eyes on the floor, and his hands pressed to his ears,\
but he began trembling all over. The voice continued.\
\
\'93The question now is, my young thinker reflected, is it possible that such\
a period will ever come? If it does, everything is determined and humanity\
is settled for ever. But as, owing to man\'92s inveterate stupidity, this\
cannot come about for at least a thousand years, every one who recognizes\
the truth even now may legitimately order his life as he pleases, on the\
new principles. In that sense, \'91all things are lawful\'92 for him. What\'92s\
more, even if this period never comes to pass, since there is anyway no\
God and no immortality, the new man may well become the man\uc0\u8208 god, even if\
he is the only one in the whole world, and promoted to his new position,\
he may lightheartedly overstep all the barriers of the old morality of the\
old slave\uc0\u8208 man, if necessary. There is no law for God. Where God stands,\
the place is holy. Where I stand will be at once the foremost place ...\
\'91all things are lawful\'92 and that\'92s the end of it! That\'92s all very\
charming; but if you want to swindle why do you want a moral sanction for\
doing it? But that\'92s our modern Russian all over. He can\'92t bring himself\
to swindle without a moral sanction. He is so in love with truth\'97\'94\
\
The visitor talked, obviously carried away by his own eloquence, speaking\
louder and louder and looking ironically at his host. But he did not\
succeed in finishing; Ivan suddenly snatched a glass from the table and\
flung it at the orator.\
\
\'93_Ah, mais c\'92est b\'eate enfin_,\'94 cried the latter, jumping up from the sofa\
and shaking the drops of tea off himself. \'93He remembers Luther\'92s inkstand!\
He takes me for a dream and throws glasses at a dream! It\'92s like a woman!\
I suspected you were only pretending to stop up your ears.\'94\
\
A loud, persistent knocking was suddenly heard at the window. Ivan jumped\
up from the sofa.\
\
\'93Do you hear? You\'92d better open,\'94 cried the visitor; \'93it\'92s your brother\
Alyosha with the most interesting and surprising news, I\'92ll be bound!\'94\
\
\'93Be silent, deceiver, I knew it was Alyosha, I felt he was coming, and of\
course he has not come for nothing; of course he brings \'91news,\'92 \'94 Ivan\
exclaimed frantically.\
\
\'93Open, open to him. There\'92s a snowstorm and he is your brother. _Monsieur\
sait\uc0\u8208 il le temps qu\'92il fait? C\'92est \'e0 ne pas mettre un chien dehors_.\'94\
\
The knocking continued. Ivan wanted to rush to the window, but something\
seemed to fetter his arms and legs. He strained every effort to break his\
chains, but in vain. The knocking at the window grew louder and louder. At\
last the chains were broken and Ivan leapt up from the sofa. He looked\
round him wildly. Both candles had almost burnt out, the glass he had just\
thrown at his visitor stood before him on the table, and there was no one\
on the sofa opposite. The knocking on the window frame went on\
persistently, but it was by no means so loud as it had seemed in his\
dream; on the contrary, it was quite subdued.\
\
\'93It was not a dream! No, I swear it was not a dream, it all happened just\
now!\'94 cried Ivan. He rushed to the window and opened the movable pane.\
\
\'93Alyosha, I told you not to come,\'94 he cried fiercely to his brother. \'93In\
two words, what do you want? In two words, do you hear?\'94\
\
\'93An hour ago Smerdyakov hanged himself,\'94 Alyosha answered from the yard.\
\
\'93Come round to the steps, I\'92ll open at once,\'94 said Ivan, going to open the\
door to Alyosha.\
\
\
\
Chapter X. \'93It Was He Who Said That\'94\
\
\
Alyosha coming in told Ivan that a little over an hour ago Marya\
Kondratyevna had run to his rooms and informed him Smerdyakov had taken\
his own life. \'93I went in to clear away the samovar and he was hanging on a\
nail in the wall.\'94 On Alyosha\'92s inquiring whether she had informed the\
police, she answered that she had told no one, \'93but I flew straight to\
you, I\'92ve run all the way.\'94 She seemed perfectly crazy, Alyosha reported,\
and was shaking like a leaf. When Alyosha ran with her to the cottage, he\
found Smerdyakov still hanging. On the table lay a note: \'93I destroy my\
life of my own will and desire, so as to throw no blame on any one.\'94\
Alyosha left the note on the table and went straight to the police captain\
and told him all about it. \'93And from him I\'92ve come straight to you,\'94 said\
Alyosha, in conclusion, looking intently into Ivan\'92s face. He had not\
taken his eyes off him while he told his story, as though struck by\
something in his expression.\
\
\'93Brother,\'94 he cried suddenly, \'93you must be terribly ill. You look and\
don\'92t seem to understand what I tell you.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s a good thing you came,\'94 said Ivan, as though brooding, and not\
hearing Alyosha\'92s exclamation. \'93I knew he had hanged himself.\'94\
\
\'93From whom?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know. But I knew. Did I know? Yes, he told me. He told me so just\
now.\'94\
\
Ivan stood in the middle of the room, and still spoke in the same brooding\
tone, looking at the ground.\
\
\'93Who is _he_?\'94 asked Alyosha, involuntarily looking round.\
\
\'93He\'92s slipped away.\'94\
\
Ivan raised his head and smiled softly.\
\
\'93He was afraid of you, of a dove like you. You are a \'91pure cherub.\'92 Dmitri\
calls you a cherub. Cherub!... the thunderous rapture of the seraphim.\
What are seraphim? Perhaps a whole constellation. But perhaps that\
constellation is only a chemical molecule. There\'92s a constellation of the\
Lion and the Sun. Don\'92t you know it?\'94\
\
\'93Brother, sit down,\'94 said Alyosha in alarm. \'93For goodness\'92 sake, sit down\
on the sofa! You are delirious; put your head on the pillow, that\'92s right.\
Would you like a wet towel on your head? Perhaps it will do you good.\'94\
\
\'93Give me the towel: it\'92s here on the chair. I just threw it down there.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s not here. Don\'92t worry yourself. I know where it is\'97here,\'94 said\
Alyosha, finding a clean towel, folded up and unused, by Ivan\'92s dressing\uc0\u8208 \
table in the other corner of the room. Ivan looked strangely at the towel:\
recollection seemed to come back to him for an instant.\
\
\'93Stay\'94\'97he got up from the sofa\'97\'93an hour ago I took that new towel from\
there and wetted it. I wrapped it round my head and threw it down here ...\
How is it it\'92s dry? There was no other.\'94\
\
\'93You put that towel on your head?\'94 asked Alyosha.\
\
\'93Yes, and walked up and down the room an hour ago ... Why have the candles\
burnt down so? What\'92s the time?\'94\
\
\'93Nearly twelve.\'94\
\
\'93No, no, no!\'94 Ivan cried suddenly. \'93It was not a dream. He was here; he\
was sitting here, on that sofa. When you knocked at the window, I threw a\
glass at him ... this one. Wait a minute. I was asleep last time, but this\
dream was not a dream. It has happened before. I have dreams now, Alyosha\
... yet they are not dreams, but reality. I walk about, talk and see ...\
though I am asleep. But he was sitting here, on that sofa there.... He is\
frightfully stupid, Alyosha, frightfully stupid.\'94 Ivan laughed suddenly\
and began pacing about the room.\
\
\'93Who is stupid? Of whom are you talking, brother?\'94 Alyosha asked anxiously\
again.\
\
\'93The devil! He\'92s taken to visiting me. He\'92s been here twice, almost three\
times. He taunted me with being angry at his being a simple devil and not\
Satan, with scorched wings, in thunder and lightning. But he is not Satan:\
that\'92s a lie. He is an impostor. He is simply a devil\'97a paltry, trivial\
devil. He goes to the baths. If you undressed him, you\'92d be sure to find\
he had a tail, long and smooth like a Danish dog\'92s, a yard long, dun\
color.... Alyosha, you are cold. You\'92ve been in the snow. Would you like\
some tea? What? Is it cold? Shall I tell her to bring some? _C\'92est \'e0 ne\
pas mettre un chien dehors._...\'94\
\
Alyosha ran to the washing\uc0\u8208 stand, wetted the towel, persuaded Ivan to sit\
down again, and put the wet towel round his head. He sat down beside him.\
\
\'93What were you telling me just now about Lise?\'94 Ivan began again. (He was\
becoming very talkative.) \'93I like Lise. I said something nasty about her.\
It was a lie. I like her ... I am afraid for Katya to\uc0\u8208 morrow. I am more\
afraid of her than of anything. On account of the future. She will cast me\
off to\uc0\u8208 morrow and trample me under foot. She thinks that I am ruining\
Mitya from jealousy on her account! Yes, she thinks that! But it\'92s not so.\
To\uc0\u8208 morrow the cross, but not the gallows. No, I shan\'92t hang myself. Do you\
know, I can never commit suicide, Alyosha. Is it because I am base? I am\
not a coward. Is it from love of life? How did I know that Smerdyakov had\
hanged himself? Yes, it was _he_ told me so.\'94\
\
\'93And you are quite convinced that there has been some one here?\'94 asked\
Alyosha.\
\
\'93Yes, on that sofa in the corner. You would have driven him away. You did\
drive him away: he disappeared when you arrived. I love your face,\
Alyosha. Did you know that I loved your face? And _he_ is myself, Alyosha.\
All that\'92s base in me, all that\'92s mean and contemptible. Yes, I am a\
romantic. He guessed it ... though it\'92s a libel. He is frightfully stupid;\
but it\'92s to his advantage. He has cunning, animal cunning\'97he knew how to\
infuriate me. He kept taunting me with believing in him, and that was how\
he made me listen to him. He fooled me like a boy. He told me a great deal\
that was true about myself, though. I should never have owned it to\
myself. Do you know, Alyosha,\'94 Ivan added in an intensely earnest and\
confidential tone, \'93I should be awfully glad to think that it was _he_ and\
not I.\'94\
\
\'93He has worn you out,\'94 said Alyosha, looking compassionately at his\
brother.\
\
\'93He\'92s been teasing me. And you know he does it so cleverly, so cleverly.\
\'91Conscience! What is conscience? I make it up for myself. Why am I\
tormented by it? From habit. From the universal habit of mankind for the\
seven thousand years. So let us give it up, and we shall be gods.\'92 It was\
he said that, it was he said that!\'94\
\
\'93And not you, not you?\'94 Alyosha could not help crying, looking frankly at\
his brother. \'93Never mind him, anyway; have done with him and forget him.\
And let him take with him all that you curse now, and never come back!\'94\
\
\'93Yes, but he is spiteful. He laughed at me. He was impudent, Alyosha,\'94\
Ivan said, with a shudder of offense. \'93But he was unfair to me, unfair to\
me about lots of things. He told lies about me to my face. \'91Oh, you are\
going to perform an act of heroic virtue: to confess you murdered your\
father, that the valet murdered him at your instigation.\'92 \'94\
\
\'93Brother,\'94 Alyosha interposed, \'93restrain yourself. It was not you murdered\
him. It\'92s not true!\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s what he says, he, and he knows it. \'91You are going to perform an\
act of heroic virtue, and you don\'92t believe in virtue; that\'92s what\
tortures you and makes you angry, that\'92s why you are so vindictive.\'92 He\
said that to me about me and he knows what he says.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s you say that, not he,\'94 exclaimed Alyosha mournfully, \'93and you say it\
because you are ill and delirious, tormenting yourself.\'94\
\
\'93No, he knows what he says. \'91You are going from pride,\'92 he says. \'91You\'92ll\
stand up and say it was I killed him, and why do you writhe with horror?\
You are lying! I despise your opinion, I despise your horror!\'92 He said\
that about me. \'91And do you know you are longing for their praise\'97\'93he is a\
criminal, a murderer, but what a generous soul; he wanted to save his\
brother and he confessed.\'94 \'92 That\'92s a lie, Alyosha!\'94 Ivan cried suddenly,\
with flashing eyes. \'93I don\'92t want the low rabble to praise me, I swear I\
don\'92t! That\'92s a lie! That\'92s why I threw the glass at him and it broke\
against his ugly face.\'94\
\
\'93Brother, calm yourself, stop!\'94 Alyosha entreated him.\
\
\'93Yes, he knows how to torment one. He\'92s cruel,\'94 Ivan went on, unheeding.\
\'93I had an inkling from the first what he came for. \'91Granting that you go\
through pride, still you had a hope that Smerdyakov might be convicted and\
sent to Siberia, and Mitya would be acquitted, while you would only be\
punished with moral condemnation\'92 (\'91Do you hear?\'92 he laughed then)\'97\'91and\
some people will praise you. But now Smerdyakov\'92s dead, he has hanged\
himself, and who\'92ll believe you alone? But yet you are going, you are\
going, you\'92ll go all the same, you\'92ve decided to go. What are you going\
for now?\'92 That\'92s awful, Alyosha. I can\'92t endure such questions. Who dare\
ask me such questions?\'94\
\
\'93Brother,\'94 interposed Alyosha\'97his heart sank with terror, but he still\
seemed to hope to bring Ivan to reason\'97\'93how could he have told you of\
Smerdyakov\'92s death before I came, when no one knew of it and there was no\
time for any one to know of it?\'94\
\
\'93He told me,\'94 said Ivan firmly, refusing to admit a doubt. \'93It was all he\
did talk about, if you come to that. \'91And it would be all right if you\
believed in virtue,\'92 he said. \'91No matter if they disbelieve you, you are\
going for the sake of principle. But you are a little pig like Fyodor\
Pavlovitch, and what do you want with virtue? Why do you want to go\
meddling if your sacrifice is of no use to any one? Because you don\'92t know\
yourself why you go! Oh, you\'92d give a great deal to know yourself why you\
go! And can you have made up your mind? You\'92ve not made up your mind.\
You\'92ll sit all night deliberating whether to go or not. But you will go;\
you know you\'92ll go. You know that whichever way you decide, the decision\
does not depend on you. You\'92ll go because you won\'92t dare not to go. Why\
won\'92t you dare? You must guess that for yourself. That\'92s a riddle for\
you!\'92 He got up and went away. You came and he went. He called me a\
coward, Alyosha! _Le mot de l\'92\'e9nigme_ is that I am a coward. \'91It is not\
for such eagles to soar above the earth.\'92 It was he added that\'97he! And\
Smerdyakov said the same. He must be killed! Katya despises me. I\'92ve seen\
that for a month past. Even Lise will begin to despise me! \'91You are going\
in order to be praised.\'92 That\'92s a brutal lie! And you despise me too,\
Alyosha. Now I am going to hate you again! And I hate the monster, too! I\
hate the monster! I don\'92t want to save the monster. Let him rot in\
Siberia! He\'92s begun singing a hymn! Oh, to\uc0\u8208 morrow I\'92ll go, stand before\
them, and spit in their faces!\'94\
\
He jumped up in a frenzy, flung off the towel, and fell to pacing up and\
down the room again. Alyosha recalled what he had just said. \'93I seem to be\
sleeping awake.... I walk, I speak, I see, but I am asleep.\'94 It seemed to\
be just like that now. Alyosha did not leave him. The thought passed\
through his mind to run for a doctor, but he was afraid to leave his\
brother alone: there was no one to whom he could leave him. By degrees\
Ivan lost consciousness completely at last. He still went on talking,\
talking incessantly, but quite incoherently, and even articulated his\
words with difficulty. Suddenly he staggered violently; but Alyosha was in\
time to support him. Ivan let him lead him to his bed. Alyosha undressed\
him somehow and put him to bed. He sat watching over him for another two\
hours. The sick man slept soundly, without stirring, breathing softly and\
evenly. Alyosha took a pillow and lay down on the sofa, without\
undressing.\
\
As he fell asleep he prayed for Mitya and Ivan. He began to understand\
Ivan\'92s illness. \'93The anguish of a proud determination. An earnest\
conscience!\'94 God, in Whom he disbelieved, and His truth were gaining\
mastery over his heart, which still refused to submit. \'93Yes,\'94 the thought\
floated through Alyosha\'92s head as it lay on the pillow, \'93yes, if\
Smerdyakov is dead, no one will believe Ivan\'92s evidence; but he will go\
and give it.\'94 Alyosha smiled softly. \'93God will conquer!\'94 he thought. \'93He\
will either rise up in the light of truth, or ... he\'92ll perish in hate,\
revenging on himself and on every one his having served the cause he does\
not believe in,\'94 Alyosha added bitterly, and again he prayed for Ivan.\
\
\
\
\
Book XII. A Judicial Error\
\
\
\
Chapter I. The Fatal Day\
\
\
At ten o\'92clock in the morning of the day following the events I have\
described, the trial of Dmitri Karamazov began in our district court.\
\
I hasten to emphasize the fact that I am far from esteeming myself capable\
of reporting all that took place at the trial in full detail, or even in\
the actual order of events. I imagine that to mention everything with full\
explanation would fill a volume, even a very large one. And so I trust I\
may not be reproached, for confining myself to what struck me. I may have\
selected as of most interest what was of secondary importance, and may\
have omitted the most prominent and essential details. But I see I shall\
do better not to apologize. I will do my best and the reader will see for\
himself that I have done all I can.\
\
And, to begin with, before entering the court, I will mention what\
surprised me most on that day. Indeed, as it appeared later, every one was\
surprised at it, too. We all knew that the affair had aroused great\
interest, that every one was burning with impatience for the trial to\
begin, that it had been a subject of talk, conjecture, exclamation and\
surmise for the last two months in local society. Every one knew, too,\
that the case had become known throughout Russia, but yet we had not\
imagined that it had aroused such burning, such intense, interest in every\
one, not only among ourselves, but all over Russia. This became evident at\
the trial this day.\
\
Visitors had arrived not only from the chief town of our province, but\
from several other Russian towns, as well as from Moscow and Petersburg.\
Among them were lawyers, ladies, and even several distinguished\
personages. Every ticket of admission had been snatched up. A special\
place behind the table at which the three judges sat was set apart for the\
most distinguished and important of the men visitors; a row of arm\uc0\u8208 chairs\
had been placed there\'97something exceptional, which had never been allowed\
before. A large proportion\'97not less than half of the public\'97were ladies.\
There was such a large number of lawyers from all parts that they did not\
know where to seat them, for every ticket had long since been eagerly\
sought for and distributed. I saw at the end of the room, behind the\
platform, a special partition hurriedly put up, behind which all these\
lawyers were admitted, and they thought themselves lucky to have standing\
room there, for all chairs had been removed for the sake of space, and the\
crowd behind the partition stood throughout the case closely packed,\
shoulder to shoulder.\
\
Some of the ladies, especially those who came from a distance, made their\
appearance in the gallery very smartly dressed, but the majority of the\
ladies were oblivious even of dress. Their faces betrayed hysterical,\
intense, almost morbid, curiosity. A peculiar fact\'97established afterwards\
by many observations\'97was that almost all the ladies, or, at least the vast\
majority of them, were on Mitya\'92s side and in favor of his being\
acquitted. This was perhaps chiefly owing to his reputation as a conqueror\
of female hearts. It was known that two women rivals were to appear in the\
case. One of them\'97Katerina Ivanovna\'97was an object of general interest. All\
sorts of extraordinary tales were told about her, amazing anecdotes of her\
passion for Mitya, in spite of his crime. Her pride and \'93aristocratic\
connections\'94 were particularly insisted upon (she had called upon scarcely\
any one in the town). People said she intended to petition the Government\
for leave to accompany the criminal to Siberia and to be married to him\
somewhere in the mines. The appearance of Grushenka in court was awaited\
with no less impatience. The public was looking forward with anxious\
curiosity to the meeting of the two rivals\'97the proud aristocratic girl and\
\'93the hetaira.\'94 But Grushenka was a more familiar figure to the ladies of\
the district than Katerina Ivanovna. They had already seen \'93the woman who\
had ruined Fyodor Pavlovitch and his unhappy son,\'94 and all, almost without\
exception, wondered how father and son could be so in love with \'93such a\
very common, ordinary Russian girl, who was not even pretty.\'94\
\
In brief, there was a great deal of talk. I know for a fact that there\
were several serious family quarrels on Mitya\'92s account in our town. Many\
ladies quarreled violently with their husbands over differences of opinion\
about the dreadful case, and it was only natural that the husbands of\
these ladies, far from being favorably disposed to the prisoner, should\
enter the court bitterly prejudiced against him. In fact, one may say\
pretty certainly that the masculine, as distinguished from the feminine,\
part of the audience were biased against the prisoner. There were numbers\
of severe, frowning, even vindictive faces. Mitya, indeed, had managed to\
offend many people during his stay in the town. Some of the visitors were,\
of course, in excellent spirits and quite unconcerned as to the fate of\
Mitya personally. But all were interested in the trial, and the majority\
of the men were certainly hoping for the conviction of the criminal,\
except perhaps the lawyers, who were more interested in the legal than in\
the moral aspect of the case.\
\
Everybody was excited at the presence of the celebrated lawyer,\
Fetyukovitch. His talent was well known, and this was not the first time\
he had defended notorious criminal cases in the provinces. And if he\
defended them, such cases became celebrated and long remembered all over\
Russia. There were stories, too, about our prosecutor and about the\
President of the Court. It was said that Ippolit Kirillovitch was in a\
tremor at meeting Fetyukovitch, and that they had been enemies from the\
beginning of their careers in Petersburg, that though our sensitive\
prosecutor, who always considered that he had been aggrieved by some one\
in Petersburg because his talents had not been properly appreciated, was\
keenly excited over the Karamazov case, and was even dreaming of\
rebuilding his flagging fortunes by means of it, Fetyukovitch, they said,\
was his one anxiety. But these rumors were not quite just. Our prosecutor\
was not one of those men who lose heart in face of danger. On the\
contrary, his self\uc0\u8208 confidence increased with the increase of danger. It\
must be noted that our prosecutor was in general too hasty and morbidly\
impressionable. He would put his whole soul into some case and work at it\
as though his whole fate and his whole fortune depended on its result.\
This was the subject of some ridicule in the legal world, for just by this\
characteristic our prosecutor had gained a wider notoriety than could have\
been expected from his modest position. People laughed particularly at his\
passion for psychology. In my opinion, they were wrong, and our prosecutor\
was, I believe, a character of greater depth than was generally supposed.\
But with his delicate health he had failed to make his mark at the outset\
of his career and had never made up for it later.\
\
As for the President of our Court, I can only say that he was a humane and\
cultured man, who had a practical knowledge of his work and progressive\
views. He was rather ambitious, but did not concern himself greatly about\
his future career. The great aim of his life was to be a man of advanced\
ideas. He was, too, a man of connections and property. He felt, as we\
learnt afterwards, rather strongly about the Karamazov case, but from a\
social, not from a personal standpoint. He was interested in it as a\
social phenomenon, in its classification and its character as a product of\
our social conditions, as typical of the national character, and so on,\
and so on. His attitude to the personal aspect of the case, to its tragic\
significance and the persons involved in it, including the prisoner, was\
rather indifferent and abstract, as was perhaps fitting, indeed.\
\
The court was packed and overflowing long before the judges made their\
appearance. Our court is the best hall in the town\'97spacious, lofty, and\
good for sound. On the right of the judges, who were on a raised platform,\
a table and two rows of chairs had been put ready for the jury. On the\
left was the place for the prisoner and the counsel for the defense. In\
the middle of the court, near the judges, was a table with the \'93material\
proofs.\'94 On it lay Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s white silk dressing\uc0\u8208 gown, stained\
with blood; the fatal brass pestle with which the supposed murder had been\
committed; Mitya\'92s shirt, with a blood\uc0\u8208 stained sleeve; his coat, stained\
with blood in patches over the pocket in which he had put his\
handkerchief; the handkerchief itself, stiff with blood and by now quite\
yellow; the pistol loaded by Mitya at Perhotin\'92s with a view to suicide,\
and taken from him on the sly at Mokroe by Trifon Borissovitch; the\
envelope in which the three thousand roubles had been put ready for\
Grushenka, the narrow pink ribbon with which it had been tied, and many\
other articles I don\'92t remember. In the body of the hall, at some\
distance, came the seats for the public. But in front of the balustrade a\
few chairs had been placed for witnesses who remained in the court after\
giving their evidence.\
\
At ten o\'92clock the three judges arrived\'97the President, one honorary\
justice of the peace, and one other. The prosecutor, of course, entered\
immediately after. The President was a short, stout, thick\uc0\u8208 set man of\
fifty, with a dyspeptic complexion, dark hair turning gray and cut short,\
and a red ribbon, of what Order I don\'92t remember. The prosecutor struck me\
and the others, too, as looking particularly pale, almost green. His face\
seemed to have grown suddenly thinner, perhaps in a single night, for I\
had seen him looking as usual only two days before. The President began\
with asking the court whether all the jury were present.\
\
But I see I can\'92t go on like this, partly because some things I did not\
hear, others I did not notice, and others I have forgotten, but most of\
all because, as I have said before, I have literally no time or space to\
mention everything that was said and done. I only know that neither side\
objected to very many of the jurymen. I remember the twelve jurymen\'97four\
were petty officials of the town, two were merchants, and six peasants and\
artisans of the town. I remember, long before the trial, questions were\
continually asked with some surprise, especially by ladies: \'93Can such a\
delicate, complex and psychological case be submitted for decision to\
petty officials and even peasants?\'94 and \'93What can an official, still more\
a peasant, understand in such an affair?\'94 All the four officials in the\
jury were, in fact, men of no consequence and of low rank. Except one who\
was rather younger, they were gray\uc0\u8208 headed men, little known in society,\
who had vegetated on a pitiful salary, and who probably had elderly,\
unpresentable wives and crowds of children, perhaps even without shoes and\
stockings. At most, they spent their leisure over cards and, of course,\
had never read a single book. The two merchants looked respectable, but\
were strangely silent and stolid. One of them was close\uc0\u8208 shaven, and was\
dressed in European style; the other had a small, gray beard, and wore a\
red ribbon with some sort of a medal upon it on his neck. There is no need\
to speak of the artisans and the peasants. The artisans of\
Skotoprigonyevsk are almost peasants, and even work on the land. Two of\
them also wore European dress, and, perhaps for that reason, were dirtier\
and more uninviting\uc0\u8208 looking than the others. So that one might well\
wonder, as I did as soon as I had looked at them, \'93what men like that\
could possibly make of such a case?\'94 Yet their faces made a strangely\
imposing, almost menacing, impression; they were stern and frowning.\
\
At last the President opened the case of the murder of Fyodor Pavlovitch\
Karamazov. I don\'92t quite remember how he described him. The court usher\
was told to bring in the prisoner, and Mitya made his appearance. There\
was a hush through the court. One could have heard a fly. I don\'92t know how\
it was with others, but Mitya made a most unfavorable impression on me. He\
looked an awful dandy in a brand\uc0\u8208 new frock\u8208 coat. I heard afterwards that\
he had ordered it in Moscow expressly for the occasion from his own\
tailor, who had his measure. He wore immaculate black kid gloves and\
exquisite linen. He walked in with his yard\uc0\u8208 long strides, looking stiffly\
straight in front of him, and sat down in his place with a most\
unperturbed air.\
\
At the same moment the counsel for defense, the celebrated Fetyukovitch,\
entered, and a sort of subdued hum passed through the court. He was a\
tall, spare man, with long thin legs, with extremely long, thin, pale\
fingers, clean\uc0\u8208 shaven face, demurely brushed, rather short hair, and thin\
lips that were at times curved into something between a sneer and a smile.\
He looked about forty. His face would have been pleasant, if it had not\
been for his eyes, which, in themselves small and inexpressive, were set\
remarkably close together, with only the thin, long nose as a dividing\
line between them. In fact, there was something strikingly birdlike about\
his face. He was in evening dress and white tie.\
\
I remember the President\'92s first questions to Mitya, about his name, his\
calling, and so on. Mitya answered sharply, and his voice was so\
unexpectedly loud that it made the President start and look at the\
prisoner with surprise. Then followed a list of persons who were to take\
part in the proceedings\'97that is, of the witnesses and experts. It was a\
long list. Four of the witnesses were not present\'97Mi\'fcsov, who had given\
evidence at the preliminary inquiry, but was now in Paris; Madame Hohlakov\
and Maximov, who were absent through illness; and Smerdyakov, through his\
sudden death, of which an official statement from the police was\
presented. The news of Smerdyakov\'92s death produced a sudden stir and\
whisper in the court. Many of the audience, of course, had not heard of\
the sudden suicide. What struck people most was Mitya\'92s sudden outburst As\
soon as the statement of Smerdyakov\'92s death was made, he cried out aloud\
from his place:\
\
\'93He was a dog and died like a dog!\'94\
\
I remember how his counsel rushed to him, and how the President addressed\
him, threatening to take stern measures, if such an irregularity were\
repeated. Mitya nodded and in a subdued voice repeated several times\
abruptly to his counsel, with no show of regret:\
\
\'93I won\'92t again, I won\'92t. It escaped me. I won\'92t do it again.\'94\
\
And, of course, this brief episode did him no good with the jury or the\
public. His character was displayed, and it spoke for itself. It was under\
the influence of this incident that the opening statement was read. It was\
rather short, but circumstantial. It only stated the chief reasons why he\
had been arrested, why he must be tried, and so on. Yet it made a great\
impression on me. The clerk read it loudly and distinctly. The whole\
tragedy was suddenly unfolded before us, concentrated, in bold relief, in\
a fatal and pitiless light. I remember how, immediately after it had been\
read, the President asked Mitya in a loud impressive voice:\
\
\'93Prisoner, do you plead guilty?\'94\
\
Mitya suddenly rose from his seat.\
\
\'93I plead guilty to drunkenness and dissipation,\'94 he exclaimed, again in a\
startling, almost frenzied, voice, \'93to idleness and debauchery. I meant to\
become an honest man for good, just at the moment when I was struck down\
by fate. But I am not guilty of the death of that old man, my enemy and my\
father. No, no, I am not guilty of robbing him! I could not be. Dmitri\
Karamazov is a scoundrel, but not a thief.\'94\
\
He sat down again, visibly trembling all over. The President again\
briefly, but impressively, admonished him to answer only what was asked,\
and not to go off into irrelevant exclamations. Then he ordered the case\
to proceed. All the witnesses were led up to take the oath. Then I saw\
them all together. The brothers of the prisoner were, however, allowed to\
give evidence without taking the oath. After an exhortation from the\
priest and the President, the witnesses were led away and were made to sit\
as far as possible apart from one another. Then they began calling them up\
one by one.\
\
\
\
Chapter II. Dangerous Witnesses\
\
\
I do not know whether the witnesses for the defense and for the\
prosecution were separated into groups by the President, and whether it\
was arranged to call them in a certain order. But no doubt it was so. I\
only know that the witnesses for the prosecution were called first. I\
repeat I don\'92t intend to describe all the questions step by step. Besides,\
my account would be to some extent superfluous, because in the speeches\
for the prosecution and for the defense the whole course of the evidence\
was brought together and set in a strong and significant light, and I took\
down parts of those two remarkable speeches in full, and will quote them\
in due course, together with one extraordinary and quite unexpected\
episode, which occurred before the final speeches, and undoubtedly\
influenced the sinister and fatal outcome of the trial.\
\
I will only observe that from the first moments of the trial one peculiar\
characteristic of the case was conspicuous and observed by all, that is,\
the overwhelming strength of the prosecution as compared with the\
arguments the defense had to rely upon. Every one realized it from the\
first moment that the facts began to group themselves round a single\
point, and the whole horrible and bloody crime was gradually revealed.\
Every one, perhaps, felt from the first that the case was beyond dispute,\
that there was no doubt about it, that there could be really no\
discussion, and that the defense was only a matter of form, and that the\
prisoner was guilty, obviously and conclusively guilty. I imagine that\
even the ladies, who were so impatiently longing for the acquittal of the\
interesting prisoner, were at the same time, without exception, convinced\
of his guilt. What\'92s more, I believe they would have been mortified if his\
guilt had not been so firmly established, as that would have lessened the\
effect of the closing scene of the criminal\'92s acquittal. That he would be\
acquitted, all the ladies, strange to say, were firmly persuaded up to the\
very last moment. \'93He is guilty, but he will be acquitted, from motives of\
humanity, in accordance with the new ideas, the new sentiments that had\
come into fashion,\'94 and so on, and so on. And that was why they had\
crowded into the court so impatiently. The men were more interested in the\
contest between the prosecutor and the famous Fetyukovitch. All were\
wondering and asking themselves what could even a talent like\
Fetyukovitch\'92s make of such a desperate case; and so they followed his\
achievements, step by step, with concentrated attention.\
\
But Fetyukovitch remained an enigma to all up to the very end, up to his\
speech. Persons of experience suspected that he had some design, that he\
was working towards some object, but it was almost impossible to guess\
what it was. His confidence and self\uc0\u8208 reliance were unmistakable, however.\
Every one noticed with pleasure, moreover, that he, after so short a stay,\
not more than three days, perhaps, among us, had so wonderfully succeeded\
in mastering the case and \'93had studied it to a nicety.\'94 People described\
with relish, afterwards, how cleverly he had \'93taken down\'94 all the\
witnesses for the prosecution, and as far as possible perplexed them and,\
what\'92s more, had aspersed their reputation and so depreciated the value of\
their evidence. But it was supposed that he did this rather by way of\
sport, so to speak, for professional glory, to show nothing had been\
omitted of the accepted methods, for all were convinced that he could do\
no real good by such disparagement of the witnesses, and probably was more\
aware of this than any one, having some idea of his own in the background,\
some concealed weapon of defense, which he would suddenly reveal when the\
time came. But meanwhile, conscious of his strength, he seemed to be\
diverting himself.\
\
So, for instance, when Grigory, Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s old servant, who had\
given the most damning piece of evidence about the open door, was\
examined, the counsel for the defense positively fastened upon him when\
his turn came to question him. It must be noted that Grigory entered the\
hall with a composed and almost stately air, not the least disconcerted by\
the majesty of the court or the vast audience listening to him. He gave\
evidence with as much confidence as though he had been talking with his\
Marfa, only perhaps more respectfully. It was impossible to make him\
contradict himself. The prosecutor questioned him first in detail about\
the family life of the Karamazovs. The family picture stood out in lurid\
colors. It was plain to ear and eye that the witness was guileless and\
impartial. In spite of his profound reverence for the memory of his\
deceased master, he yet bore witness that he had been unjust to Mitya and\
\'93hadn\'92t brought up his children as he should. He\'92d have been devoured by\
lice when he was little, if it hadn\'92t been for me,\'94 he added, describing\
Mitya\'92s early childhood. \'93It wasn\'92t fair either of the father to wrong his\
son over his mother\'92s property, which was by right his.\'94\
\
In reply to the prosecutor\'92s question what grounds he had for asserting\
that Fyodor Pavlovitch had wronged his son in their money relations,\
Grigory, to the surprise of every one, had no proof at all to bring\
forward, but he still persisted that the arrangement with the son was\
\'93unfair,\'94 and that he ought \'93to have paid him several thousand roubles\
more.\'94 I must note, by the way, that the prosecutor asked this question\
whether Fyodor Pavlovitch had really kept back part of Mitya\'92s inheritance\
with marked persistence of all the witnesses who could be asked it, not\
excepting Alyosha and Ivan, but he obtained no exact information from any\
one; all alleged that it was so, but were unable to bring forward any\
distinct proof. Grigory\'92s description of the scene at the dinner\uc0\u8208 table,\
when Dmitri had burst in and beaten his father, threatening to come back\
to kill him, made a sinister impression on the court, especially as the\
old servant\'92s composure in telling it, his parsimony of words and peculiar\
phraseology, were as effective as eloquence. He observed that he was not\
angry with Mitya for having knocked him down and struck him on the face;\
he had forgiven him long ago, he said. Of the deceased Smerdyakov he\
observed, crossing himself, that he was a lad of ability, but stupid and\
afflicted, and, worse still, an infidel, and that it was Fyodor Pavlovitch\
and his elder son who had taught him to be so. But he defended\
Smerdyakov\'92s honesty almost with warmth, and related how Smerdyakov had\
once found the master\'92s money in the yard, and, instead of concealing it,\
had taken it to his master, who had rewarded him with a \'93gold piece\'94 for\
it, and trusted him implicitly from that time forward. He maintained\
obstinately that the door into the garden had been open. But he was asked\
so many questions that I can\'92t recall them all.\
\
At last the counsel for the defense began to cross\uc0\u8208 examine him, and the\
first question he asked was about the envelope in which Fyodor Pavlovitch\
was supposed to have put three thousand roubles for \'93a certain person.\'94\
\'93Have you ever seen it, you, who were for so many years in close\
attendance on your master?\'94 Grigory answered that he had not seen it and\
had never heard of the money from any one \'93till everybody was talking\
about it.\'94 This question about the envelope Fetyukovitch put to every one\
who could conceivably have known of it, as persistently as the prosecutor\
asked his question about Dmitri\'92s inheritance, and got the same answer\
from all, that no one had seen the envelope, though many had heard of it.\
From the beginning every one noticed Fetyukovitch\'92s persistence on this\
subject.\
\
\'93Now, with your permission I\'92ll ask you a question,\'94 Fetyukovitch said,\
suddenly and unexpectedly. \'93Of what was that balsam, or, rather,\
decoction, made, which, as we learn from the preliminary inquiry, you used\
on that evening to rub your lumbago, in the hope of curing it?\'94\
\
Grigory looked blankly at the questioner, and after a brief silence\
muttered, \'93There was saffron in it.\'94\
\
\'93Nothing but saffron? Don\'92t you remember any other ingredient?\'94\
\
\'93There was milfoil in it, too.\'94\
\
\'93And pepper perhaps?\'94 Fetyukovitch queried.\
\
\'93Yes, there was pepper, too.\'94\
\
\'93Etcetera. And all dissolved in vodka?\'94\
\
\'93In spirit.\'94\
\
There was a faint sound of laughter in the court.\
\
\'93You see, in spirit. After rubbing your back, I believe, you drank what\
was left in the bottle with a certain pious prayer, only known to your\
wife?\'94\
\
\'93I did.\'94\
\
\'93Did you drink much? Roughly speaking, a wine\uc0\u8208 glass or two?\'94\
\
\'93It might have been a tumbler\uc0\u8208 full.\'94\
\
\'93A tumbler\uc0\u8208 full, even. Perhaps a tumbler and a half?\'94\
\
Grigory did not answer. He seemed to see what was meant.\
\
\'93A glass and a half of neat spirit\'97is not at all bad, don\'92t you think? You\
might see the gates of heaven open, not only the door into the garden?\'94\
\
Grigory remained silent. There was another laugh in the court. The\
President made a movement.\
\
\'93Do you know for a fact,\'94 Fetyukovitch persisted, \'93whether you were awake\
or not when you saw the open door?\'94\
\
\'93I was on my legs.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s not a proof that you were awake.\'94 (There was again laughter in the\
court.) \'93Could you have answered at that moment, if any one had asked you\
a question\'97for instance, what year it is?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know.\'94\
\
\'93And what year is it, Anno Domini, do you know?\'94\
\
Grigory stood with a perplexed face, looking straight at his tormentor.\
Strange to say, it appeared he really did not know what year it was.\
\
\'93But perhaps you can tell me how many fingers you have on your hands?\'94\
\
\'93I am a servant,\'94 Grigory said suddenly, in a loud and distinct voice. \'93If\
my betters think fit to make game of me, it is my duty to suffer it.\'94\
\
Fetyukovitch was a little taken aback, and the President intervened,\
reminding him that he must ask more relevant questions. Fetyukovitch bowed\
with dignity and said that he had no more questions to ask of the witness.\
The public and the jury, of course, were left with a grain of doubt in\
their minds as to the evidence of a man who might, while undergoing a\
certain cure, have seen \'93the gates of heaven,\'94 and who did not even know\
what year he was living in. But before Grigory left the box another\
episode occurred. The President, turning to the prisoner, asked him\
whether he had any comment to make on the evidence of the last witness.\
\
\'93Except about the door, all he has said is true,\'94 cried Mitya, in a loud\
voice. \'93For combing the lice off me, I thank him; for forgiving my blows,\
I thank him. The old man has been honest all his life and as faithful to\
my father as seven hundred poodles.\'94\
\
\'93Prisoner, be careful in your language,\'94 the President admonished him.\
\
\'93I am not a poodle,\'94 Grigory muttered.\
\
\'93All right, it\'92s I am a poodle myself,\'94 cried Mitya. \'93If it\'92s an insult, I\
take it to myself and I beg his pardon. I was a beast and cruel to him. I\
was cruel to \'c6sop too.\'94\
\
\'93What \'c6sop?\'94 the President asked sternly again.\
\
\'93Oh, Pierrot ... my father, Fyodor Pavlovitch.\'94\
\
The President again and again warned Mitya impressively and very sternly\
to be more careful in his language.\
\
\'93You are injuring yourself in the opinion of your judges.\'94\
\
The counsel for the defense was equally clever in dealing with the\
evidence of Rakitin. I may remark that Rakitin was one of the leading\
witnesses and one to whom the prosecutor attached great significance. It\
appeared that he knew everything; his knowledge was amazing, he had been\
everywhere, seen everything, talked to everybody, knew every detail of the\
biography of Fyodor Pavlovitch and all the Karamazovs. Of the envelope, it\
is true, he had only heard from Mitya himself. But he described minutely\
Mitya\'92s exploits in the \'93Metropolis,\'94 all his compromising doings and\
sayings, and told the story of Captain Snegiryov\'92s \'93wisp of tow.\'94 But even\
Rakitin could say nothing positive about Mitya\'92s inheritance, and confined\
himself to contemptuous generalities.\
\
\'93Who could tell which of them was to blame, and which was in debt to the\
other, with their crazy Karamazov way of muddling things so that no one\
could make head or tail of it?\'94 He attributed the tragic crime to the\
habits that had become ingrained by ages of serfdom and the distressed\
condition of Russia, due to the lack of appropriate institutions. He was,\
in fact, allowed some latitude of speech. This was the first occasion on\
which Rakitin showed what he could do, and attracted notice. The\
prosecutor knew that the witness was preparing a magazine article on the\
case, and afterwards in his speech, as we shall see later, quoted some\
ideas from the article, showing that he had seen it already. The picture\
drawn by the witness was a gloomy and sinister one, and greatly\
strengthened the case for the prosecution. Altogether, Rakitin\'92s discourse\
fascinated the public by its independence and the extraordinary nobility\
of its ideas. There were even two or three outbreaks of applause when he\
spoke of serfdom and the distressed condition of Russia.\
\
But Rakitin, in his youthful ardor, made a slight blunder, of which the\
counsel for the defense at once adroitly took advantage. Answering certain\
questions about Grushenka, and carried away by the loftiness of his own\
sentiments and his success, of which he was, of course, conscious, he went\
so far as to speak somewhat contemptuously of Agrafena Alexandrovna as\
\'93the kept mistress of Samsonov.\'94 He would have given a good deal to take\
back his words afterwards, for Fetyukovitch caught him out over it at\
once. And it was all because Rakitin had not reckoned on the lawyer having\
been able to become so intimately acquainted with every detail in so short\
a time.\
\
\'93Allow me to ask,\'94 began the counsel for the defense, with the most\
affable and even respectful smile, \'93you are, of course, the same Mr.\
Rakitin whose pamphlet, _The Life of the Deceased Elder, Father Zossima_,\
published by the diocesan authorities, full of profound and religious\
reflections and preceded by an excellent and devout dedication to the\
bishop, I have just read with such pleasure?\'94\
\
\'93I did not write it for publication ... it was published afterwards,\'94\
muttered Rakitin, for some reason fearfully disconcerted and almost\
ashamed.\
\
\'93Oh, that\'92s excellent! A thinker like you can, and indeed ought to, take\
the widest view of every social question. Your most instructive pamphlet\
has been widely circulated through the patronage of the bishop, and has\
been of appreciable service.... But this is the chief thing I should like\
to learn from you. You stated just now that you were very intimately\
acquainted with Madame Svyetlov.\'94 (It must be noted that Grushenka\'92s\
surname was Svyetlov. I heard it for the first time that day, during the\
case.)\
\
\'93I cannot answer for all my acquaintances.... I am a young man ... and who\
can be responsible for every one he meets?\'94 cried Rakitin, flushing all\
over.\
\
\'93I understand, I quite understand,\'94 cried Fetyukovitch, as though he, too,\
were embarrassed and in haste to excuse himself. \'93You, like any other,\
might well be interested in an acquaintance with a young and beautiful\
woman who would readily entertain the _\'e9lite_ of the youth of the\
neighborhood, but ... I only wanted to know ... It has come to my\
knowledge that Madame Svyetlov was particularly anxious a couple of months\
ago to make the acquaintance of the younger Karamazov, Alexey\
Fyodorovitch, and promised you twenty\uc0\u8208 five roubles, if you would bring him\
to her in his monastic dress. And that actually took place on the evening\
of the day on which the terrible crime, which is the subject of the\
present investigation, was committed. You brought Alexey Karamazov to\
Madame Svyetlov, and did you receive the twenty\uc0\u8208 five roubles from Madame\
Svyetlov as a reward, that\'92s what I wanted to hear from you?\'94\
\
\'93It was a joke.... I don\'92t see of what interest that can be to you.... I\
took it for a joke ... meaning to give it back later....\'94\
\
\'93Then you did take\'97 But you have not given it back yet ... or have you?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s of no consequence,\'94 muttered Rakitin, \'93I refuse to answer such\
questions.... Of course I shall give it back.\'94\
\
The President intervened, but Fetyukovitch declared he had no more\
questions to ask of the witness. Mr. Rakitin left the witness\uc0\u8208 box not\
absolutely without a stain upon his character. The effect left by the\
lofty idealism of his speech was somewhat marred, and Fetyukovitch\'92s\
expression, as he watched him walk away, seemed to suggest to the public\
\'93this is a specimen of the lofty\uc0\u8208 minded persons who accuse him.\'94 I\
remember that this incident, too, did not pass off without an outbreak\
from Mitya. Enraged by the tone in which Rakitin had referred to\
Grushenka, he suddenly shouted \'93Bernard!\'94 When, after Rakitin\'92s cross\uc0\u8208 \
examination, the President asked the prisoner if he had anything to say,\
Mitya cried loudly:\
\
\'93Since I\'92ve been arrested, he has borrowed money from me! He is a\
contemptible Bernard and opportunist, and he doesn\'92t believe in God; he\
took the bishop in!\'94\
\
Mitya, of course, was pulled up again for the intemperance of his\
language, but Rakitin was done for. Captain Snegiryov\'92s evidence was a\
failure, too, but from quite a different reason. He appeared in ragged and\
dirty clothes, muddy boots, and in spite of the vigilance and expert\
observation of the police officers, he turned out to be hopelessly drunk.\
On being asked about Mitya\'92s attack upon him, he refused to answer.\
\
\'93God bless him. Ilusha told me not to. God will make it up to me yonder.\'94\
\
\'93Who told you not to tell? Of whom are you talking?\'94\
\
\'93Ilusha, my little son. \'91Father, father, how he insulted you!\'92 He said\
that at the stone. Now he is dying....\'94\
\
The captain suddenly began sobbing, and plumped down on his knees before\
the President. He was hurriedly led away amidst the laughter of the\
public. The effect prepared by the prosecutor did not come off at all.\
\
Fetyukovitch went on making the most of every opportunity, and amazed\
people more and more by his minute knowledge of the case. Thus, for\
example, Trifon Borissovitch made a great impression, of course, very\
prejudicial to Mitya. He calculated almost on his fingers that on his\
first visit to Mokroe, Mitya must have spent three thousand roubles, \'93or\
very little less. Just think what he squandered on those gypsy girls\
alone! And as for our lousy peasants, it wasn\'92t a case of flinging half a\
rouble in the street, he made them presents of twenty\uc0\u8208 five roubles each,\
at least, he didn\'92t give them less. And what a lot of money was simply\
stolen from him! And if any one did steal, he did not leave a receipt. How\
could one catch the thief when he was flinging his money away all the\
time? Our peasants are robbers, you know; they have no care for their\
souls. And the way he went on with the girls, our village girls! They\'92re\
completely set up since then, I tell you, they used to be poor.\'94 He\
recalled, in fact, every item of expense and added it all up. So the\
theory that only fifteen hundred had been spent and the rest had been put\
aside in a little bag seemed inconceivable.\
\
\'93I saw three thousand as clear as a penny in his hands, I saw it with my\
own eyes; I should think I ought to know how to reckon money,\'94 cried\
Trifon Borissovitch, doing his best to satisfy \'93his betters.\'94\
\
When Fetyukovitch had to cross\uc0\u8208 examine him, he scarcely tried to refute\
his evidence, but began asking him about an incident at the first carousal\
at Mokroe, a month before the arrest, when Timofey and another peasant\
called Akim had picked up on the floor in the passage a hundred roubles\
dropped by Mitya when he was drunk, and had given them to Trifon\
Borissovitch and received a rouble each from him for doing so. \'93Well,\'94\
asked the lawyer, \'93did you give that hundred roubles back to Mr.\
Karamazov?\'94 Trifon Borissovitch shuffled in vain.... He was obliged, after\
the peasants had been examined, to admit the finding of the hundred\
roubles, only adding that he had religiously returned it all to Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch \'93in perfect honesty, and it\'92s only because his honor was in\
liquor at the time, he wouldn\'92t remember it.\'94 But, as he had denied the\
incident of the hundred roubles till the peasants had been called to prove\
it, his evidence as to returning the money to Mitya was naturally regarded\
with great suspicion. So one of the most dangerous witnesses brought\
forward by the prosecution was again discredited.\
\
The same thing happened with the Poles. They took up an attitude of pride\
and independence; they vociferated loudly that they had both been in the\
service of the Crown, and that \'93Pan Mitya\'94 had offered them three thousand\
\'93to buy their honor,\'94 and that they had seen a large sum of money in his\
hands. Pan Mussyalovitch introduced a terrible number of Polish words into\
his sentences, and seeing that this only increased his consequence in the\
eyes of the President and the prosecutor, grew more and more pompous, and\
ended by talking in Polish altogether. But Fetyukovitch caught them, too,\
in his snares. Trifon Borissovitch, recalled, was forced, in spite of his\
evasions, to admit that Pan Vrublevsky had substituted another pack of\
cards for the one he had provided, and that Pan Mussyalovitch had cheated\
during the game. Kalganov confirmed this, and both the Poles left the\
witness\uc0\u8208 box with damaged reputations, amidst laughter from the public.\
\
Then exactly the same thing happened with almost all the most dangerous\
witnesses. Fetyukovitch succeeded in casting a slur on all of them, and\
dismissing them with a certain derision. The lawyers and experts were lost\
in admiration, and were only at a loss to understand what good purpose\
could be served by it, for all, I repeat, felt that the case for the\
prosecution could not be refuted, but was growing more and more tragically\
overwhelming. But from the confidence of the \'93great magician\'94 they saw\
that he was serene, and they waited, feeling that \'93such a man\'94 had not\
come from Petersburg for nothing, and that he was not a man to return\
unsuccessful.\
\
\
\
Chapter III. The Medical Experts And A Pound Of Nuts\
\
\
The evidence of the medical experts, too, was of little use to the\
prisoner. And it appeared later that Fetyukovitch had not reckoned much\
upon it. The medical line of defense had only been taken up through the\
insistence of Katerina Ivanovna, who had sent for a celebrated doctor from\
Moscow on purpose. The case for the defense could, of course, lose nothing\
by it and might, with luck, gain something from it. There was, however, an\
element of comedy about it, through the difference of opinion of the\
doctors. The medical experts were the famous doctor from Moscow, our\
doctor, Herzenstube, and the young doctor, Varvinsky. The two latter\
appeared also as witnesses for the prosecution.\
\
The first to be called in the capacity of expert was Doctor Herzenstube.\
He was a gray and bald old man of seventy, of middle height and sturdy\
build. He was much esteemed and respected by every one in the town. He was\
a conscientious doctor and an excellent and pious man, a Hernguter or\
Moravian brother, I am not quite sure which. He had been living amongst us\
for many years and behaved with wonderful dignity. He was a kind\uc0\u8208 hearted\
and humane man. He treated the sick poor and peasants for nothing, visited\
them in their slums and huts, and left money for medicine, but he was as\
obstinate as a mule. If once he had taken an idea into his head, there was\
no shaking it. Almost every one in the town was aware, by the way, that\
the famous doctor had, within the first two or three days of his presence\
among us, uttered some extremely offensive allusions to Doctor\
Herzenstube\'92s qualifications. Though the Moscow doctor asked twenty\uc0\u8208 five\
roubles for a visit, several people in the town were glad to take\
advantage of his arrival, and rushed to consult him regardless of expense.\
All these had, of course, been previously patients of Doctor Herzenstube,\
and the celebrated doctor had criticized his treatment with extreme\
harshness. Finally, he had asked the patients as soon as he saw them,\
\'93Well, who has been cramming you with nostrums? Herzenstube? He, he!\'94\
Doctor Herzenstube, of course, heard all this, and now all the three\
doctors made their appearance, one after another, to be examined.\
\
Doctor Herzenstube roundly declared that the abnormality of the prisoner\'92s\
mental faculties was self\uc0\u8208 evident. Then giving his grounds for this\
opinion, which I omit here, he added that the abnormality was not only\
evident in many of the prisoner\'92s actions in the past, but was apparent\
even now at this very moment. When he was asked to explain how it was\
apparent now at this moment, the old doctor, with simple\uc0\u8208 hearted\
directness, pointed out that the prisoner on entering the court had \'93an\
extraordinary air, remarkable in the circumstances\'94; that he had \'93marched\
in like a soldier, looking straight before him, though it would have been\
more natural for him to look to the left where, among the public, the\
ladies were sitting, seeing that he was a great admirer of the fair sex\
and must be thinking much of what the ladies are saying of him now,\'94 the\
old man concluded in his peculiar language.\
\
I must add that he spoke Russian readily, but every phrase was formed in\
German style, which did not, however, trouble him, for it had always been\
a weakness of his to believe that he spoke Russian perfectly, better\
indeed than Russians. And he was very fond of using Russian proverbs,\
always declaring that the Russian proverbs were the best and most\
expressive sayings in the whole world. I may remark, too, that in\
conversation, through absent\uc0\u8208 mindedness he often forgot the most ordinary\
words, which sometimes went out of his head, though he knew them\
perfectly. The same thing happened, though, when he spoke German, and at\
such times he always waved his hand before his face as though trying to\
catch the lost word, and no one could induce him to go on speaking till he\
had found the missing word. His remark that the prisoner ought to have\
looked at the ladies on entering roused a whisper of amusement in the\
audience. All our ladies were very fond of our old doctor; they knew, too,\
that having been all his life a bachelor and a religious man of exemplary\
conduct, he looked upon women as lofty creatures. And so his unexpected\
observation struck every one as very queer.\
\
The Moscow doctor, being questioned in his turn, definitely and\
emphatically repeated that he considered the prisoner\'92s mental condition\
abnormal in the highest degree. He talked at length and with erudition of\
\'93aberration\'94 and \'93mania,\'94 and argued that, from all the facts collected,\
the prisoner had undoubtedly been in a condition of aberration for several\
days before his arrest, and, if the crime had been committed by him, it\
must, even if he were conscious of it, have been almost involuntary, as he\
had not the power to control the morbid impulse that possessed him.\
\
But apart from temporary aberration, the doctor diagnosed mania, which\
premised, in his words, to lead to complete insanity in the future. (It\
must be noted that I report this in my own words, the doctor made use of\
very learned and professional language.) \'93All his actions are in\
contravention of common sense and logic,\'94 he continued. \'93Not to refer to\
what I have not seen, that is, the crime itself and the whole catastrophe,\
the day before yesterday, while he was talking to me, he had an\
unaccountably fixed look in his eye. He laughed unexpectedly when there\
was nothing to laugh at. He showed continual and inexplicable\
irritability, using strange words, \'91Bernard!\'92 \'91Ethics!\'92 and others equally\
inappropriate.\'94 But the doctor detected mania, above all, in the fact that\
the prisoner could not even speak of the three thousand roubles, of which\
he considered himself to have been cheated, without extraordinary\
irritation, though he could speak comparatively lightly of other\
misfortunes and grievances. According to all accounts, he had even in the\
past, whenever the subject of the three thousand roubles was touched on,\
flown into a perfect frenzy, and yet he was reported to be a disinterested\
and not grasping man.\
\
\'93As to the opinion of my learned colleague,\'94 the Moscow doctor added\
ironically in conclusion, \'93that the prisoner would, on entering the court,\
have naturally looked at the ladies and not straight before him, I will\
only say that, apart from the playfulness of this theory, it is radically\
unsound. For though I fully agree that the prisoner, on entering the court\
where his fate will be decided, would not naturally look straight before\
him in that fixed way, and that that may really be a sign of his abnormal\
mental condition, at the same time I maintain that he would naturally not\
look to the left at the ladies, but, on the contrary, to the right to find\
his legal adviser, on whose help all his hopes rest and on whose defense\
all his future depends.\'94 The doctor expressed his opinion positively and\
emphatically.\
\
But the unexpected pronouncement of Doctor Varvinsky gave the last touch\
of comedy to the difference of opinion between the experts. In his opinion\
the prisoner was now, and had been all along, in a perfectly normal\
condition, and, although he certainly must have been in a nervous and\
exceedingly excited state before his arrest, this might have been due to\
several perfectly obvious causes, jealousy, anger, continual drunkenness,\
and so on. But this nervous condition would not involve the mental\
aberration of which mention had just been made. As to the question whether\
the prisoner should have looked to the left or to the right on entering\
the court, \'93in his modest opinion,\'94 the prisoner would naturally look\
straight before him on entering the court, as he had in fact done, as that\
was where the judges, on whom his fate depended, were sitting. So that it\
was just by looking straight before him that he showed his perfectly\
normal state of mind at the present. The young doctor concluded his\
\'93modest\'94 testimony with some heat.\
\
\'93Bravo, doctor!\'94 cried Mitya, from his seat, \'93just so!\'94\
\
Mitya, of course, was checked, but the young doctor\'92s opinion had a\
decisive influence on the judges and on the public, and, as appeared\
afterwards, every one agreed with him. But Doctor Herzenstube, when called\
as a witness, was quite unexpectedly of use to Mitya. As an old resident\
in the town who had known the Karamazov family for years, he furnished\
some facts of great value for the prosecution, and suddenly, as though\
recalling something, he added:\
\
\'93But the poor young man might have had a very different life, for he had a\
good heart both in childhood and after childhood, that I know. But the\
Russian proverb says, \'91If a man has one head, it\'92s good, but if another\
clever man comes to visit him, it would be better still, for then there\
will be two heads and not only one.\'92 \'94\
\
\'93One head is good, but two are better,\'94 the prosecutor put in impatiently.\
He knew the old man\'92s habit of talking slowly and deliberately, regardless\
of the impression he was making and of the delay he was causing, and\
highly prizing his flat, dull and always gleefully complacent German wit.\
The old man was fond of making jokes.\
\
\'93Oh, yes, that\'92s what I say,\'94 he went on stubbornly. \'93One head is good,\
but two are much better, but he did not meet another head with wits, and\
his wits went. Where did they go? I\'92ve forgotten the word.\'94 He went on,\
passing his hand before his eyes, \'93Oh, yes, _spazieren_.\'94\
\
\'93Wandering?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, yes, wandering, that\'92s what I say. Well, his wits went wandering and\
fell in such a deep hole that he lost himself. And yet he was a grateful\
and sensitive boy. Oh, I remember him very well, a little chap so high,\
left neglected by his father in the back yard, when he ran about without\
boots on his feet, and his little breeches hanging by one button.\'94\
\
A note of feeling and tenderness suddenly came into the honest old man\'92s\
voice. Fetyukovitch positively started, as though scenting something, and\
caught at it instantly.\
\
\'93Oh, yes, I was a young man then.... I was ... well, I was forty\uc0\u8208 five\
then, and had only just come here. And I was so sorry for the boy then; I\
asked myself why shouldn\'92t I buy him a pound of ... a pound of what? I\'92ve\
forgotten what it\'92s called. A pound of what children are very fond of,\
what is it, what is it?\'94 The doctor began waving his hands again. \'93It\
grows on a tree and is gathered and given to every one....\'94\
\
\'93Apples?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no, no. You have a dozen of apples, not a pound.... No, there are a\
lot of them, and all little. You put them in the mouth and crack.\'94\
\
\'93Nuts?\'94\
\
\'93Quite so, nuts, I say so.\'94 The doctor repeated in the calmest way as\
though he had been at no loss for a word. \'93And I bought him a pound of\
nuts, for no one had ever bought the boy a pound of nuts before. And I\
lifted my finger and said to him, \'91Boy, _Gott der Vater_.\'92 He laughed and\
said, \'91_Gott der Vater_.\'92... \'91_Gott der Sohn_.\'92 He laughed again and\
lisped, \'91_Gott der Sohn_.\'92 \'91_Gott der heilige Geist_.\'92 Then he laughed and\
said as best he could, \'91_Gott der heilige Geist_.\'92 I went away, and two\
days after I happened to be passing, and he shouted to me of himself,\
\'91Uncle, _Gott der Vater, Gott der Sohn_,\'92 and he had only forgotten \'91_Gott\
der heilige Geist_.\'92 But I reminded him of it and I felt very sorry for\
him again. But he was taken away, and I did not see him again. Twenty\uc0\u8208 \
three years passed. I am sitting one morning in my study, a white\uc0\u8208 haired\
old man, when there walks into the room a blooming young man, whom I\
should never have recognized, but he held up his finger and said,\
laughing, \'91_Gott der Vater, Gott der Sohn_, and _Gott der heilige Geist_.\
I have just arrived and have come to thank you for that pound of nuts, for\
no one else ever bought me a pound of nuts; you are the only one that ever\
did.\'92 And then I remembered my happy youth and the poor child in the yard,\
without boots on his feet, and my heart was touched and I said, \'91You are a\
grateful young man, for you have remembered all your life the pound of\
nuts I bought you in your childhood.\'92 And I embraced him and blessed him.\
And I shed tears. He laughed, but he shed tears, too ... for the Russian\
often laughs when he ought to be weeping. But he did weep; I saw it. And\
now, alas!...\'94\
\
\'93And I am weeping now, German, I am weeping now, too, you saintly man,\'94\
Mitya cried suddenly.\
\
In any case the anecdote made a certain favorable impression on the\
public. But the chief sensation in Mitya\'92s favor was created by the\
evidence of Katerina Ivanovna, which I will describe directly. Indeed,\
when the witnesses _\'e0 d\'e9charge_, that is, called by the defense, began\
giving evidence, fortune seemed all at once markedly more favorable to\
Mitya, and what was particularly striking, this was a surprise even to the\
counsel for the defense. But before Katerina Ivanovna was called, Alyosha\
was examined, and he recalled a fact which seemed to furnish positive\
evidence against one important point made by the prosecution.\
\
\
\
Chapter IV. Fortune Smiles On Mitya\
\
\
It came quite as a surprise even to Alyosha himself. He was not required\
to take the oath, and I remember that both sides addressed him very gently\
and sympathetically. It was evident that his reputation for goodness had\
preceded him. Alyosha gave his evidence modestly and with restraint, but\
his warm sympathy for his unhappy brother was unmistakable. In answer to\
one question, he sketched his brother\'92s character as that of a man,\
violent\uc0\u8208 tempered perhaps and carried away by his passions, but at the same\
time honorable, proud and generous, capable of self\uc0\u8208 sacrifice, if\
necessary. He admitted, however, that, through his passion for Grushenka\
and his rivalry with his father, his brother had been of late in an\
intolerable position. But he repelled with indignation the suggestion that\
his brother might have committed a murder for the sake of gain, though he\
recognized that the three thousand roubles had become almost an obsession\
with Mitya; that he looked upon them as part of the inheritance he had\
been cheated of by his father, and that, indifferent as he was to money as\
a rule, he could not even speak of that three thousand without fury. As\
for the rivalry of the two \'93ladies,\'94 as the prosecutor expressed it\'97that\
is, of Grushenka and Katya\'97he answered evasively and was even unwilling to\
answer one or two questions altogether.\
\
\'93Did your brother tell you, anyway, that he intended to kill your father?\'94\
asked the prosecutor. \'93You can refuse to answer if you think necessary,\'94\
he added.\
\
\'93He did not tell me so directly,\'94 answered Alyosha.\
\
\'93How so? Did he indirectly?\'94\
\
\'93He spoke to me once of his hatred for our father and his fear that at an\
extreme moment ... at a moment of fury, he might perhaps murder him.\'94\
\
\'93And you believed him?\'94\
\
\'93I am afraid to say that I did. But I never doubted that some higher\
feeling would always save him at the fatal moment, as it has indeed saved\
him, for it was not he killed my father,\'94 Alyosha said firmly, in a loud\
voice that was heard throughout the court.\
\
The prosecutor started like a war\uc0\u8208 horse at the sound of a trumpet.\
\
\'93Let me assure you that I fully believe in the complete sincerity of your\
conviction and do not explain it by or identify it with your affection for\
your unhappy brother. Your peculiar view of the whole tragic episode is\
known to us already from the preliminary investigation. I won\'92t attempt to\
conceal from you that it is highly individual and contradicts all the\
other evidence collected by the prosecution. And so I think it essential\
to press you to tell me what facts have led you to this conviction of your\
brother\'92s innocence and of the guilt of another person against whom you\
gave evidence at the preliminary inquiry?\'94\
\
\'93I only answered the questions asked me at the preliminary inquiry,\'94\
replied Alyosha, slowly and calmly. \'93I made no accusation against\
Smerdyakov of myself.\'94\
\
\'93Yet you gave evidence against him?\'94\
\
\'93I was led to do so by my brother Dmitri\'92s words. I was told what took\
place at his arrest and how he had pointed to Smerdyakov before I was\
examined. I believe absolutely that my brother is innocent, and if he\
didn\'92t commit the murder, then\'97\'94\
\
\'93Then Smerdyakov? Why Smerdyakov? And why are you so completely persuaded\
of your brother\'92s innocence?\'94\
\
\'93I cannot help believing my brother. I know he wouldn\'92t lie to me. I saw\
from his face he wasn\'92t lying.\'94\
\
\'93Only from his face? Is that all the proof you have?\'94\
\
\'93I have no other proof.\'94\
\
\'93And of Smerdyakov\'92s guilt you have no proof whatever but your brother\'92s\
word and the expression of his face?\'94\
\
\'93No, I have no other proof.\'94\
\
The prosecutor dropped the examination at this point. The impression left\
by Alyosha\'92s evidence on the public was most disappointing. There had been\
talk about Smerdyakov before the trial; some one had heard something, some\
one had pointed out something else, it was said that Alyosha had gathered\
together some extraordinary proofs of his brother\'92s innocence and\
Smerdyakov\'92s guilt, and after all there was nothing, no evidence except\
certain moral convictions so natural in a brother.\
\
But Fetyukovitch began his cross\uc0\u8208 examination. On his asking Alyosha when\
it was that the prisoner had told him of his hatred for his father and\
that he might kill him, and whether he had heard it, for instance, at\
their last meeting before the catastrophe, Alyosha started as he answered,\
as though only just recollecting and understanding something.\
\
\'93I remember one circumstance now which I\'92d quite forgotten myself. It\
wasn\'92t clear to me at the time, but now\'97\'94\
\
And, obviously only now for the first time struck by an idea, he recounted\
eagerly how, at his last interview with Mitya that evening under the tree,\
on the road to the monastery, Mitya had struck himself on the breast, \'93the\
upper part of the breast,\'94 and had repeated several times that he had a\
means of regaining his honor, that that means was here, here on his\
breast. \'93I thought, when he struck himself on the breast, he meant that it\
was in his heart,\'94 Alyosha continued, \'93that he might find in his heart\
strength to save himself from some awful disgrace which was awaiting him\
and which he did not dare confess even to me. I must confess I did think\
at the time that he was speaking of our father, and that the disgrace he\
was shuddering at was the thought of going to our father and doing some\
violence to him. Yet it was just then that he pointed to something on his\
breast, so that I remember the idea struck me at the time that the heart\
is not on that part of the breast, but below, and that he struck himself\
much too high, just below the neck, and kept pointing to that place. My\
idea seemed silly to me at the time, but he was perhaps pointing then to\
that little bag in which he had fifteen hundred roubles!\'94\
\
\'93Just so,\'94 Mitya cried from his place. \'93That\'92s right, Alyosha, it was the\
little bag I struck with my fist.\'94\
\
Fetyukovitch flew to him in hot haste entreating him to keep quiet, and at\
the same instant pounced on Alyosha. Alyosha, carried away himself by his\
recollection, warmly expressed his theory that this disgrace was probably\
just that fifteen hundred roubles on him, which he might have returned to\
Katerina Ivanovna as half of what he owed her, but which he had yet\
determined not to repay her and to use for another purpose\'97namely, to\
enable him to elope with Grushenka, if she consented.\
\
\'93It is so, it must be so,\'94 exclaimed Alyosha, in sudden excitement. \'93My\
brother cried several times that half of the disgrace, half of it (he said\
_half_ several times) he could free himself from at once, but that he was\
so unhappy in his weakness of will that he wouldn\'92t do it ... that he knew\
beforehand he was incapable of doing it!\'94\
\
\'93And you clearly, confidently remember that he struck himself just on this\
part of the breast?\'94 Fetyukovitch asked eagerly.\
\
\'93Clearly and confidently, for I thought at the time, \'91Why does he strike\
himself up there when the heart is lower down?\'92 and the thought seemed\
stupid to me at the time ... I remember its seeming stupid ... it flashed\
through my mind. That\'92s what brought it back to me just now. How could I\
have forgotten it till now? It was that little bag he meant when he said\
he had the means but wouldn\'92t give back that fifteen hundred. And when he\
was arrested at Mokroe he cried out\'97I know, I was told it\'97that he\
considered it the most disgraceful act of his life that when he had the\
means of repaying Katerina Ivanovna half (half, note!) what he owed her,\
he yet could not bring himself to repay the money and preferred to remain\
a thief in her eyes rather than part with it. And what torture, what\
torture that debt has been to him!\'94 Alyosha exclaimed in conclusion.\
\
The prosecutor, of course, intervened. He asked Alyosha to describe once\
more how it had all happened, and several times insisted on the question,\
\'93Had the prisoner seemed to point to anything? Perhaps he had simply\
struck himself with his fist on the breast?\'94\
\
\'93But it was not with his fist,\'94 cried Alyosha; \'93he pointed with his\
fingers and pointed here, very high up.... How could I have so completely\
forgotten it till this moment?\'94\
\
The President asked Mitya what he had to say to the last witness\'92s\
evidence. Mitya confirmed it, saying that he had been pointing to the\
fifteen hundred roubles which were on his breast, just below the neck, and\
that that was, of course, the disgrace, \'93A disgrace I cannot deny, the\
most shameful act of my whole life,\'94 cried Mitya. \'93I might have repaid it\
and didn\'92t repay it. I preferred to remain a thief in her eyes rather than\
give it back. And the most shameful part of it was that I knew beforehand\
I shouldn\'92t give it back! You are right, Alyosha! Thanks, Alyosha!\'94\
\
So Alyosha\'92s cross\uc0\u8208 examination ended. What was important and striking\
about it was that one fact at least had been found, and even though this\
were only one tiny bit of evidence, a mere hint at evidence, it did go\
some little way towards proving that the bag had existed and had contained\
fifteen hundred roubles and that the prisoner had not been lying at the\
preliminary inquiry when he alleged at Mokroe that those fifteen hundred\
roubles were \'93his own.\'94 Alyosha was glad. With a flushed face he moved\
away to the seat assigned to him. He kept repeating to himself: \'93How was\
it I forgot? How could I have forgotten it? And what made it come back to\
me now?\'94\
\
Katerina Ivanovna was called to the witness\uc0\u8208 box. As she entered something\
extraordinary happened in the court. The ladies clutched their lorgnettes\
and opera\uc0\u8208 glasses. There was a stir among the men: some stood up to get a\
better view. Everybody alleged afterwards that Mitya had turned \'93white as\
a sheet\'94 on her entrance. All in black, she advanced modestly, almost\
timidly. It was impossible to tell from her face that she was agitated;\
but there was a resolute gleam in her dark and gloomy eyes. I may remark\
that many people mentioned that she looked particularly handsome at that\
moment. She spoke softly but clearly, so that she was heard all over the\
court. She expressed herself with composure, or at least tried to appear\
composed. The President began his examination discreetly and very\
respectfully, as though afraid to touch on \'93certain chords,\'94 and showing\
consideration for her great unhappiness. But in answer to one of the first\
questions Katerina Ivanovna replied firmly that she had been formerly\
betrothed to the prisoner, \'93until he left me of his own accord...\'94 she\
added quietly. When they asked her about the three thousand she had\
entrusted to Mitya to post to her relations, she said firmly, \'93I didn\'92t\
give him the money simply to send it off. I felt at the time that he was\
in great need of money.... I gave him the three thousand on the\
understanding that he should post it within the month if he cared to.\
There was no need for him to worry himself about that debt afterwards.\'94\
\
I will not repeat all the questions asked her and all her answers in\
detail. I will only give the substance of her evidence.\
\
\'93I was firmly convinced that he would send off that sum as soon as he got\
money from his father,\'94 she went on. \'93I have never doubted his\
disinterestedness and his honesty ... his scrupulous honesty ... in money\
matters. He felt quite certain that he would receive the money from his\
father, and spoke to me several times about it. I knew he had a feud with\
his father and have always believed that he had been unfairly treated by\
his father. I don\'92t remember any threat uttered by him against his father.\
He certainly never uttered any such threat before me. If he had come to me\
at that time, I should have at once relieved his anxiety about that\
unlucky three thousand roubles, but he had given up coming to see me ...\
and I myself was put in such a position ... that I could not invite\
him.... And I had no right, indeed, to be exacting as to that money,\'94 she\
added suddenly, and there was a ring of resolution in her voice. \'93I was\
once indebted to him for assistance in money for more than three thousand,\
and I took it, although I could not at that time foresee that I should\
ever be in a position to repay my debt.\'94\
\
There was a note of defiance in her voice. It was then Fetyukovitch began\
his cross\uc0\u8208 examination.\
\
\'93Did that take place not here, but at the beginning of your acquaintance?\'94\
Fetyukovitch suggested cautiously, feeling his way, instantly scenting\
something favorable. I must mention in parenthesis that, though\
Fetyukovitch had been brought from Petersburg partly at the instance of\
Katerina Ivanovna herself, he knew nothing about the episode of the four\
thousand roubles given her by Mitya, and of her \'93bowing to the ground to\
him.\'94 She concealed this from him and said nothing about it, and that was\
strange. It may be pretty certainly assumed that she herself did not know\
till the very last minute whether she would speak of that episode in the\
court, and waited for the inspiration of the moment.\
\
No, I can never forget those moments. She began telling her story. She\
told everything, the whole episode that Mitya had told Alyosha, and her\
bowing to the ground, and her reason. She told about her father and her\
going to Mitya, and did not in one word, in a single hint, suggest that\
Mitya had himself, through her sister, proposed they should \'93send him\
Katerina Ivanovna\'94 to fetch the money. She generously concealed that and\
was not ashamed to make it appear as though she had of her own impulse run\
to the young officer, relying on something ... to beg him for the money.\
It was something tremendous! I turned cold and trembled as I listened. The\
court was hushed, trying to catch each word. It was something unexampled.\
Even from such a self\uc0\u8208 willed and contemptuously proud girl as she was,\
such an extremely frank avowal, such sacrifice, such self\uc0\u8208 immolation,\
seemed incredible. And for what, for whom? To save the man who had\
deceived and insulted her and to help, in however small a degree, in\
saving him, by creating a strong impression in his favor. And, indeed, the\
figure of the young officer who, with a respectful bow to the innocent\
girl, handed her his last four thousand roubles\'97all he had in the\
world\'97was thrown into a very sympathetic and attractive light, but ... I\
had a painful misgiving at heart! I felt that calumny might come of it\
later (and it did, in fact, it did). It was repeated all over the town\
afterwards with spiteful laughter that the story was perhaps not quite\
complete\'97that is, in the statement that the officer had let the young lady\
depart \'93with nothing but a respectful bow.\'94 It was hinted that something\
was here omitted.\
\
\'93And even if nothing had been omitted, if this were the whole story,\'94 the\
most highly respected of our ladies maintained, \'93even then it\'92s very\
doubtful whether it was creditable for a young girl to behave in that way,\
even for the sake of saving her father.\'94\
\
And can Katerina Ivanovna, with her intelligence, her morbid\
sensitiveness, have failed to understand that people would talk like that?\
She must have understood it, yet she made up her mind to tell everything.\
Of course, all these nasty little suspicions as to the truth of her story\
only arose afterwards and at the first moment all were deeply impressed by\
it. As for the judges and the lawyers, they listened in reverent, almost\
shame\uc0\u8208 faced silence to Katerina Ivanovna. The prosecutor did not venture\
upon even one question on the subject. Fetyukovitch made a low bow to her.\
Oh, he was almost triumphant! Much ground had been gained. For a man to\
give his last four thousand on a generous impulse and then for the same\
man to murder his father for the sake of robbing him of three thousand\'97the\
idea seemed too incongruous. Fetyukovitch felt that now the charge of\
theft, at least, was as good as disproved. \'93The case\'94 was thrown into\
quite a different light. There was a wave of sympathy for Mitya. As for\
him.... I was told that once or twice, while Katerina Ivanovna was giving\
her evidence, he jumped up from his seat, sank back again, and hid his\
face in his hands. But when she had finished, he suddenly cried in a\
sobbing voice:\
\
\'93Katya, why have you ruined me?\'94 and his sobs were audible all over the\
court. But he instantly restrained himself, and cried again:\
\
\'93Now I am condemned!\'94\
\
Then he sat rigid in his place, with his teeth clenched and his arms\
across his chest. Katerina Ivanovna remained in the court and sat down in\
her place. She was pale and sat with her eyes cast down. Those who were\
sitting near her declared that for a long time she shivered all over as\
though in a fever. Grushenka was called.\
\
I am approaching the sudden catastrophe which was perhaps the final cause\
of Mitya\'92s ruin. For I am convinced, so is every one\'97all the lawyers said\
the same afterwards\'97that if the episode had not occurred, the prisoner\
would at least have been recommended to mercy. But of that later. A few\
words first about Grushenka.\
\
She, too, was dressed entirely in black, with her magnificent black shawl\
on her shoulders. She walked to the witness\uc0\u8208 box with her smooth, noiseless\
tread, with the slightly swaying gait common in women of full figure. She\
looked steadily at the President, turning her eyes neither to the right\
nor to the left. To my thinking she looked very handsome at that moment,\
and not at all pale, as the ladies alleged afterwards. They declared, too,\
that she had a concentrated and spiteful expression. I believe that she\
was simply irritated and painfully conscious of the contemptuous and\
inquisitive eyes of our scandal\uc0\u8208 loving public. She was proud and could not\
stand contempt. She was one of those people who flare up, angry and eager\
to retaliate, at the mere suggestion of contempt. There was an element of\
timidity, too, of course, and inward shame at her own timidity, so it was\
not strange that her tone kept changing. At one moment it was angry,\
contemptuous and rough, and at another there was a sincere note of self\uc0\u8208 \
condemnation. Sometimes she spoke as though she were taking a desperate\
plunge; as though she felt, \'93I don\'92t care what happens, I\'92ll say it....\'94\
Apropos of her acquaintance with Fyodor Pavlovitch, she remarked curtly,\
\'93That\'92s all nonsense, and was it my fault that he would pester me?\'94 But a\
minute later she added, \'93It was all my fault. I was laughing at them\
both\'97at the old man and at him, too\'97and I brought both of them to this. It\
was all on account of me it happened.\'94\
\
Samsonov\'92s name came up somehow. \'93That\'92s nobody\'92s business,\'94 she snapped\
at once, with a sort of insolent defiance. \'93He was my benefactor; he took\
me when I hadn\'92t a shoe to my foot, when my family had turned me out.\'94 The\
President reminded her, though very politely, that she must answer the\
questions directly, without going off into irrelevant details. Grushenka\
crimsoned and her eyes flashed.\
\
The envelope with the notes in it she had not seen, but had only heard\
from \'93that wicked wretch\'94 that Fyodor Pavlovitch had an envelope with\
notes for three thousand in it. \'93But that was all foolishness. I was only\
laughing. I wouldn\'92t have gone to him for anything.\'94\
\
\'93To whom are you referring as \'91that wicked wretch\'92?\'94 inquired the\
prosecutor.\
\
\'93The lackey, Smerdyakov, who murdered his master and hanged himself last\
night.\'94\
\
She was, of course, at once asked what ground she had for such a definite\
accusation; but it appeared that she, too, had no grounds for it.\
\
\'93Dmitri Fyodorovitch told me so himself; you can believe him. The woman\
who came between us has ruined him; she is the cause of it all, let me\
tell you,\'94 Grushenka added. She seemed to be quivering with hatred, and\
there was a vindictive note in her voice.\
\
She was again asked to whom she was referring.\
\
\'93The young lady, Katerina Ivanovna there. She sent for me, offered me\
chocolate, tried to fascinate me. There\'92s not much true shame about her, I\
can tell you that....\'94\
\
At this point the President checked her sternly, begging her to moderate\
her language. But the jealous woman\'92s heart was burning, and she did not\
care what she did.\
\
\'93When the prisoner was arrested at Mokroe,\'94 the prosecutor asked, \'93every\
one saw and heard you run out of the next room and cry out: \'91It\'92s all my\
fault. We\'92ll go to Siberia together!\'92 So you already believed him to have\
murdered his father?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t remember what I felt at the time,\'94 answered Grushenka. \'93Every one\
was crying out that he had killed his father, and I felt that it was my\
fault, that it was on my account he had murdered him. But when he said he\
wasn\'92t guilty, I believed him at once, and I believe him now and always\
shall believe him. He is not the man to tell a lie.\'94\
\
Fetyukovitch began his cross\uc0\u8208 examination. I remember that among other\
things he asked about Rakitin and the twenty\uc0\u8208 five roubles \'93you paid him\
for bringing Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov to see you.\'94\
\
\'93There was nothing strange about his taking the money,\'94 sneered Grushenka,\
with angry contempt. \'93He was always coming to me for money: he used to get\
thirty roubles a month at least out of me, chiefly for luxuries: he had\
enough to keep him without my help.\'94\
\
\'93What led you to be so liberal to Mr. Rakitin?\'94 Fetyukovitch asked, in\
spite of an uneasy movement on the part of the President.\
\
\'93Why, he is my cousin. His mother was my mother\'92s sister. But he\'92s always\
besought me not to tell any one here of it, he is so dreadfully ashamed of\
me.\'94\
\
This fact was a complete surprise to every one; no one in the town nor in\
the monastery, not even Mitya, knew of it. I was told that Rakitin turned\
purple with shame where he sat. Grushenka had somehow heard before she\
came into the court that he had given evidence against Mitya, and so she\
was angry. The whole effect on the public, of Rakitin\'92s speech, of his\
noble sentiments, of his attacks upon serfdom and the political disorder\
of Russia, was this time finally ruined. Fetyukovitch was satisfied: it\
was another godsend. Grushenka\'92s cross\uc0\u8208 examination did not last long and,\
of course, there could be nothing particularly new in her evidence. She\
left a very disagreeable impression on the public; hundreds of\
contemptuous eyes were fixed upon her, as she finished giving her evidence\
and sat down again in the court, at a good distance from Katerina\
Ivanovna. Mitya was silent throughout her evidence. He sat as though\
turned to stone, with his eyes fixed on the ground.\
\
Ivan was called to give evidence.\
\
\
\
Chapter V. A Sudden Catastrophe\
\
\
I may note that he had been called before Alyosha. But the usher of the\
court announced to the President that, owing to an attack of illness or\
some sort of fit, the witness could not appear at the moment, but was\
ready to give his evidence as soon as he recovered. But no one seemed to\
have heard it and it only came out later.\
\
His entrance was for the first moment almost unnoticed. The principal\
witnesses, especially the two rival ladies, had already been questioned.\
Curiosity was satisfied for the time; the public was feeling almost\
fatigued. Several more witnesses were still to be heard, who probably had\
little information to give after all that had been given. Time was\
passing. Ivan walked up with extraordinary slowness, looking at no one,\
and with his head bowed, as though plunged in gloomy thought. He was\
irreproachably dressed, but his face made a painful impression, on me at\
least: there was an earthy look in it, a look like a dying man\'92s. His eyes\
were lusterless; he raised them and looked slowly round the court. Alyosha\
jumped up from his seat and moaned \'93Ah!\'94 I remember that, but it was\
hardly noticed.\
\
The President began by informing him that he was a witness not on oath,\
that he might answer or refuse to answer, but that, of course, he must\
bear witness according to his conscience, and so on, and so on. Ivan\
listened and looked at him blankly, but his face gradually relaxed into a\
smile, and as soon as the President, looking at him in astonishment,\
finished, he laughed outright.\
\
\'93Well, and what else?\'94 he asked in a loud voice.\
\
There was a hush in the court; there was a feeling of something strange.\
The President showed signs of uneasiness.\
\
\'93You ... are perhaps still unwell?\'94 he began, looking everywhere for the\
usher.\
\
\'93Don\'92t trouble yourself, your excellency, I am well enough and can tell\
you something interesting,\'94 Ivan answered with sudden calmness and\
respectfulness.\
\
\'93You have some special communication to make?\'94 the President went on,\
still mistrustfully.\
\
Ivan looked down, waited a few seconds and, raising his head, answered,\
almost stammering:\
\
\'93No ... I haven\'92t. I have nothing particular.\'94\
\
They began asking him questions. He answered, as it were, reluctantly,\
with extreme brevity, with a sort of disgust which grew more and more\
marked, though he answered rationally. To many questions he answered that\
he did not know. He knew nothing of his father\'92s money relations with\
Dmitri. \'93I wasn\'92t interested in the subject,\'94 he added. Threats to murder\
his father he had heard from the prisoner. Of the money in the envelope he\
had heard from Smerdyakov.\
\
\'93The same thing over and over again,\'94 he interrupted suddenly, with a look\
of weariness. \'93I have nothing particular to tell the court.\'94\
\
\'93I see you are unwell and understand your feelings,\'94 the President began.\
\
He turned to the prosecutor and the counsel for the defense to invite them\
to examine the witness, if necessary, when Ivan suddenly asked in an\
exhausted voice:\
\
\'93Let me go, your excellency, I feel very ill.\'94\
\
And with these words, without waiting for permission, he turned to walk\
out of the court. But after taking four steps he stood still, as though he\
had reached a decision, smiled slowly, and went back.\
\
\'93I am like the peasant girl, your excellency ... you know. How does it go?\
\'91I\'92ll stand up if I like, and I won\'92t if I don\'92t.\'92 They were trying to put\
on her sarafan to take her to church to be married, and she said, \'91I\'92ll\
stand up if I like, and I won\'92t if I don\'92t.\'92... It\'92s in some book about\
the peasantry.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean by that?\'94 the President asked severely.\
\
\'93Why, this,\'94 Ivan suddenly pulled out a roll of notes. \'93Here\'92s the money\
... the notes that lay in that envelope\'94 (he nodded towards the table on\
which lay the material evidence), \'93for the sake of which our father was\
murdered. Where shall I put them? Mr. Superintendent, take them.\'94\
\
The usher of the court took the whole roll and handed it to the President.\
\
\'93How could this money have come into your possession if it is the same\
money?\'94 the President asked wonderingly.\
\
\'93I got them from Smerdyakov, from the murderer, yesterday.... I was with\
him just before he hanged himself. It was he, not my brother, killed our\
father. He murdered him and I incited him to do it ... Who doesn\'92t desire\
his father\'92s death?\'94\
\
\'93Are you in your right mind?\'94 broke involuntarily from the President.\
\
\'93I should think I am in my right mind ... in the same nasty mind as all of\
you ... as all these ... ugly faces.\'94 He turned suddenly to the audience.\
\'93My father has been murdered and they pretend they are horrified,\'94 he\
snarled, with furious contempt. \'93They keep up the sham with one another.\
Liars! They all desire the death of their fathers. One reptile devours\
another.... If there hadn\'92t been a murder, they\'92d have been angry and gone\
home ill\uc0\u8208 humored. It\'92s a spectacle they want! _Panem et circenses_. Though\
I am one to talk! Have you any water? Give me a drink for Christ\'92s sake!\'94\
He suddenly clutched his head.\
\
The usher at once approached him. Alyosha jumped up and cried, \'93He is ill.\
Don\'92t believe him: he has brain fever.\'94 Katerina Ivanovna rose impulsively\
from her seat and, rigid with horror, gazed at Ivan. Mitya stood up and\
greedily looked at his brother and listened to him with a wild, strange\
smile.\
\
\'93Don\'92t disturb yourselves. I am not mad, I am only a murderer,\'94 Ivan began\
again. \'93You can\'92t expect eloquence from a murderer,\'94 he added suddenly for\
some reason and laughed a queer laugh.\
\
The prosecutor bent over to the President in obvious dismay. The two other\
judges communicated in agitated whispers. Fetyukovitch pricked up his ears\
as he listened: the hall was hushed in expectation. The President seemed\
suddenly to recollect himself.\
\
\'93Witness, your words are incomprehensible and impossible here. Calm\
yourself, if you can, and tell your story ... if you really have something\
to tell. How can you confirm your statement ... if indeed you are not\
delirious?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s just it. I have no proof. That cur Smerdyakov won\'92t send you\
proofs from the other world ... in an envelope. You think of nothing but\
envelopes\'97one is enough. I\'92ve no witnesses ... except one, perhaps,\'94 he\
smiled thoughtfully.\
\
\'93Who is your witness?\'94\
\
\'93He has a tail, your excellency, and that would be irregular! _Le diable\
n\'92existe point!_ Don\'92t pay attention: he is a paltry, pitiful devil,\'94 he\
added suddenly. He ceased laughing and spoke as it were, confidentially.\
\'93He is here somewhere, no doubt\'97under that table with the material\
evidence on it, perhaps. Where should he sit if not there? You see, listen\
to me. I told him I don\'92t want to keep quiet, and he talked about the\
geological cataclysm ... idiocy! Come, release the monster ... he\'92s been\
singing a hymn. That\'92s because his heart is light! It\'92s like a drunken man\
in the street bawling how \'91Vanka went to Petersburg,\'92 and I would give a\
quadrillion quadrillions for two seconds of joy. You don\'92t know me! Oh,\
how stupid all this business is! Come, take me instead of him! I didn\'92t\
come for nothing.... Why, why is everything so stupid?...\'94\
\
And he began slowly, and as it were reflectively, looking round him again.\
But the court was all excitement by now. Alyosha rushed towards him, but\
the court usher had already seized Ivan by the arm.\
\
\'93What are you about?\'94 he cried, staring into the man\'92s face, and suddenly\
seizing him by the shoulders, he flung him violently to the floor. But the\
police were on the spot and he was seized. He screamed furiously. And all\
the time he was being removed, he yelled and screamed something\
incoherent.\
\
The whole court was thrown into confusion. I don\'92t remember everything as\
it happened. I was excited myself and could not follow. I only know that\
afterwards, when everything was quiet again and every one understood what\
had happened, the court usher came in for a reprimand, though he very\
reasonably explained that the witness had been quite well, that the doctor\
had seen him an hour ago, when he had a slight attack of giddiness, but\
that, until he had come into the court, he had talked quite consecutively,\
so that nothing could have been foreseen\'97that he had, in fact, insisted on\
giving evidence. But before every one had completely regained their\
composure and recovered from this scene, it was followed by another.\
Katerina Ivanovna had an attack of hysterics. She sobbed, shrieking\
loudly, but refused to leave the court, struggled, and besought them not\
to remove her. Suddenly she cried to the President:\
\
\'93There is more evidence I must give at once ... at once! Here is a\
document, a letter ... take it, read it quickly, quickly! It\'92s a letter\
from that monster ... that man there, there!\'94 she pointed to Mitya. \'93It\
was he killed his father, you will see that directly. He wrote to me how\
he would kill his father! But the other one is ill, he is ill, he is\
delirious!\'94 she kept crying out, beside herself.\
\
The court usher took the document she held out to the President, and she,\
dropping into her chair, hiding her face in her hands, began convulsively\
and noiselessly sobbing, shaking all over, and stifling every sound for\
fear she should be ejected from the court. The document she had handed up\
was that letter Mitya had written at the \'93Metropolis\'94 tavern, which Ivan\
had spoken of as a \'93mathematical proof.\'94 Alas! its mathematical\
conclusiveness was recognized, and had it not been for that letter, Mitya\
might have escaped his doom or, at least, that doom would have been less\
terrible. It was, I repeat, difficult to notice every detail. What\
followed is still confused to my mind. The President must, I suppose, have\
at once passed on the document to the judges, the jury, and the lawyers on\
both sides. I only remember how they began examining the witness. On being\
gently asked by the President whether she had recovered sufficiently,\
Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed impetuously:\
\
\'93I am ready, I am ready! I am quite equal to answering you,\'94 she added,\
evidently still afraid that she would somehow be prevented from giving\
evidence. She was asked to explain in detail what this letter was and\
under what circumstances she received it.\
\
\'93I received it the day before the crime was committed, but he wrote it the\
day before that, at the tavern\'97that is, two days before he committed the\
crime. Look, it is written on some sort of bill!\'94 she cried breathlessly.\
\'93He hated me at that time, because he had behaved contemptibly and was\
running after that creature ... and because he owed me that three\
thousand.... Oh! he was humiliated by that three thousand on account of\
his own meanness! This is how it happened about that three thousand. I beg\
you, I beseech you, to hear me. Three weeks before he murdered his father,\
he came to me one morning. I knew he was in want of money, and what he\
wanted it for. Yes, yes\'97to win that creature and carry her off. I knew\
then that he had been false to me and meant to abandon me, and it was I,\
I, who gave him that money, who offered it to him on the pretext of his\
sending it to my sister in Moscow. And as I gave it him, I looked him in\
the face and said that he could send it when he liked, \'91in a month\'92s time\
would do.\'92 How, how could he have failed to understand that I was\
practically telling him to his face, \'91You want money to be false to me\
with your creature, so here\'92s the money for you. I give it to you myself.\
Take it, if you have so little honor as to take it!\'92 I wanted to prove\
what he was, and what happened? He took it, he took it, and squandered it\
with that creature in one night.... But he knew, he knew that I knew all\
about it. I assure you he understood, too, that I gave him that money to\
test him, to see whether he was so lost to all sense of honor as to take\
it from me. I looked into his eyes and he looked into mine, and he\
understood it all and he took it\'97he carried off my money!\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s true, Katya,\'94 Mitya roared suddenly, \'93I looked into your eyes and\
I knew that you were dishonoring me, and yet I took your money. Despise me\
as a scoundrel, despise me, all of you! I\'92ve deserved it!\'94\
\
\'93Prisoner,\'94 cried the President, \'93another word and I will order you to be\
removed.\'94\
\
\'93That money was a torment to him,\'94 Katya went on with impulsive haste. \'93He\
wanted to repay it me. He wanted to, that\'92s true; but he needed money for\
that creature, too. So he murdered his father, but he didn\'92t repay me, and\
went off with her to that village where he was arrested. There, again, he\
squandered the money he had stolen after the murder of his father. And a\
day before the murder he wrote me this letter. He was drunk when he wrote\
it. I saw it at once, at the time. He wrote it from spite, and feeling\
certain, positively certain, that I should never show it to any one, even\
if he did kill him, or else he wouldn\'92t have written it. For he knew I\
shouldn\'92t want to revenge myself and ruin him! But read it, read it\
attentively\'97more attentively, please\'97and you will see that he had\
described it all in his letter, all beforehand, how he would kill his\
father and where his money was kept. Look, please, don\'92t overlook that,\
there\'92s one phrase there, \'91I shall kill him as soon as Ivan has gone\
away.\'92 So he thought it all out beforehand how he would kill him,\'94\
Katerina Ivanovna pointed out to the court with venomous and malignant\
triumph. Oh! it was clear she had studied every line of that letter and\
detected every meaning underlining it. \'93If he hadn\'92t been drunk, he\
wouldn\'92t have written to me; but, look, everything is written there\
beforehand, just as he committed the murder after. A complete program of\
it!\'94 she exclaimed frantically.\
\
She was reckless now of all consequences to herself, though, no doubt, she\
had foreseen them even a month ago, for even then, perhaps, shaking with\
anger, she had pondered whether to show it at the trial or not. Now she\
had taken the fatal plunge. I remember that the letter was read aloud by\
the clerk, directly afterwards, I believe. It made an overwhelming\
impression. They asked Mitya whether he admitted having written the\
letter.\
\
\'93It\'92s mine, mine!\'94 cried Mitya. \'93I shouldn\'92t have written it, if I hadn\'92t\
been drunk!... We\'92ve hated each other for many things, Katya, but I swear,\
I swear I loved you even while I hated you, and you didn\'92t love me!\'94\
\
He sank back on his seat, wringing his hands in despair. The prosecutor\
and counsel for the defense began cross\uc0\u8208 examining her, chiefly to\
ascertain what had induced her to conceal such a document and to give her\
evidence in quite a different tone and spirit just before.\
\
\'93Yes, yes. I was telling lies just now. I was lying against my honor and\
my conscience, but I wanted to save him, for he has hated and despised me\
so!\'94 Katya cried madly. \'93Oh, he has despised me horribly, he has always\
despised me, and do you know, he has despised me from the very moment that\
I bowed down to him for that money. I saw that.... I felt it at once at\
the time, but for a long time I wouldn\'92t believe it. How often I have read\
it in his eyes, \'91You came of yourself, though.\'92 Oh, he didn\'92t understand,\
he had no idea why I ran to him, he can suspect nothing but baseness, he\
judged me by himself, he thought every one was like himself!\'94 Katya hissed\
furiously, in a perfect frenzy. \'93And he only wanted to marry me, because\
I\'92d inherited a fortune, because of that, because of that! I always\
suspected it was because of that! Oh, he is a brute! He was always\
convinced that I should be trembling with shame all my life before him,\
because I went to him then, and that he had a right to despise me for ever\
for it, and so to be superior to me\'97that\'92s why he wanted to marry me!\
That\'92s so, that\'92s all so! I tried to conquer him by my love\'97a love that\
knew no bounds. I even tried to forgive his faithlessness; but he\
understood nothing, nothing! How could he understand indeed? He is a\
monster! I only received that letter the next evening: it was brought me\
from the tavern\'97and only that morning, only that morning I wanted to\
forgive him everything, everything\'97even his treachery!\'94\
\
The President and the prosecutor, of course, tried to calm her. I can\'92t\
help thinking that they felt ashamed of taking advantage of her hysteria\
and of listening to such avowals. I remember hearing them say to her, \'93We\
understand how hard it is for you; be sure we are able to feel for you,\'94\
and so on, and so on. And yet they dragged the evidence out of the raving,\
hysterical woman. She described at last with extraordinary clearness,\
which is so often seen, though only for a moment, in such over\uc0\u8208 wrought\
states, how Ivan had been nearly driven out of his mind during the last\
two months trying to save \'93the monster and murderer,\'94 his brother.\
\
\'93He tortured himself,\'94 she exclaimed, \'93he was always trying to minimize\
his brother\'92s guilt and confessing to me that he, too, had never loved his\
father, and perhaps desired his death himself. Oh, he has a tender, over\uc0\u8208 \
tender conscience! He tormented himself with his conscience! He told me\
everything, everything! He came every day and talked to me as his only\
friend. I have the honor to be his only friend!\'94 she cried suddenly with a\
sort of defiance, and her eyes flashed. \'93He had been twice to see\
Smerdyakov. One day he came to me and said, \'91If it was not my brother, but\
Smerdyakov committed the murder\'92 (for the legend was circulating\
everywhere that Smerdyakov had done it), \'91perhaps I too am guilty, for\
Smerdyakov knew I didn\'92t like my father and perhaps believed that I\
desired my father\'92s death.\'92 Then I brought out that letter and showed it\
him. He was entirely convinced that his brother had done it, and he was\
overwhelmed by it. He couldn\'92t endure the thought that his own brother was\
a parricide! Only a week ago I saw that it was making him ill. During the\
last few days he has talked incoherently in my presence. I saw his mind\
was giving way. He walked about, raving; he was seen muttering in the\
streets. The doctor from Moscow, at my request, examined him the day\
before yesterday and told me that he was on the eve of brain fever\'97and all\
on his account, on account of this monster! And last night he learnt that\
Smerdyakov was dead! It was such a shock that it drove him out of his mind\
... and all through this monster, all for the sake of saving the monster!\'94\
\
Oh, of course, such an outpouring, such an avowal is only possible once in\
a lifetime\'97at the hour of death, for instance, on the way to the scaffold!\
But it was in Katya\'92s character, and it was such a moment in her life. It\
was the same impetuous Katya who had thrown herself on the mercy of a\
young profligate to save her father; the same Katya who had just before,\
in her pride and chastity, sacrificed herself and her maidenly modesty\
before all these people, telling of Mitya\'92s generous conduct, in the hope\
of softening his fate a little. And now, again, she sacrificed herself;\
but this time it was for another, and perhaps only now\'97perhaps only at\
this moment\'97she felt and knew how dear that other was to her! She had\
sacrificed herself in terror for him, conceiving all of a sudden that he\
had ruined himself by his confession that it was he who had committed the\
murder, not his brother, she had sacrificed herself to save him, to save\
his good name, his reputation!\
\
And yet one terrible doubt occurred to one\'97was she lying in her\
description of her former relations with Mitya?\'97that was the question. No,\
she had not intentionally slandered him when she cried that Mitya despised\
her for her bowing down to him! She believed it herself. She had been\
firmly convinced, perhaps ever since that bow, that the simple\uc0\u8208 hearted\
Mitya, who even then adored her, was laughing at her and despising her.\
She had loved him with an hysterical, \'93lacerated\'94 love only from pride,\
from wounded pride, and that love was not like love, but more like\
revenge. Oh! perhaps that lacerated love would have grown into real love,\
perhaps Katya longed for nothing more than that, but Mitya\'92s faithlessness\
had wounded her to the bottom of her heart, and her heart could not\
forgive him. The moment of revenge had come upon her suddenly, and all\
that had been accumulating so long and so painfully in the offended\
woman\'92s breast burst out all at once and unexpectedly. She betrayed Mitya,\
but she betrayed herself, too. And no sooner had she given full expression\
to her feelings than the tension of course was over and she was\
overwhelmed with shame. Hysterics began again: she fell on the floor,\
sobbing and screaming. She was carried out. At that moment Grushenka, with\
a wail, rushed towards Mitya before they had time to prevent her.\
\
\'93Mitya,\'94 she wailed, \'93your serpent has destroyed you! There, she has shown\
you what she is!\'94 she shouted to the judges, shaking with anger. At a\
signal from the President they seized her and tried to remove her from the\
court. She wouldn\'92t allow it. She fought and struggled to get back to\
Mitya. Mitya uttered a cry and struggled to get to her. He was\
overpowered.\
\
Yes, I think the ladies who came to see the spectacle must have been\
satisfied\'97the show had been a varied one. Then I remember the Moscow\
doctor appeared on the scene. I believe the President had previously sent\
the court usher to arrange for medical aid for Ivan. The doctor announced\
to the court that the sick man was suffering from a dangerous attack of\
brain fever, and that he must be at once removed. In answer to questions\
from the prosecutor and the counsel for the defense he said that the\
patient had come to him of his own accord the day before yesterday and\
that he had warned him that he had such an attack coming on, but he had\
not consented to be looked after. \'93He was certainly not in a normal state\
of mind: he told me himself that he saw visions when he was awake, that he\
met several persons in the street, who were dead, and that Satan visited\
him every evening,\'94 said the doctor, in conclusion. Having given his\
evidence, the celebrated doctor withdrew. The letter produced by Katerina\
Ivanovna was added to the material proofs. After some deliberation, the\
judges decided to proceed with the trial and to enter both the unexpected\
pieces of evidence (given by Ivan and Katerina Ivanovna) on the protocol.\
\
But I will not detail the evidence of the other witnesses, who only\
repeated and confirmed what had been said before, though all with their\
characteristic peculiarities. I repeat, all was brought together in the\
prosecutor\'92s speech, which I shall quote immediately. Every one was\
excited, every one was electrified by the late catastrophe, and all were\
awaiting the speeches for the prosecution and the defense with intense\
impatience. Fetyukovitch was obviously shaken by Katerina Ivanovna\'92s\
evidence. But the prosecutor was triumphant. When all the evidence had\
been taken, the court was adjourned for almost an hour. I believe it was\
just eight o\'92clock when the President returned to his seat and our\
prosecutor, Ippolit Kirillovitch, began his speech.\
\
\
\
Chapter VI. The Prosecutor\'92s Speech. Sketches Of Character\
\
\
Ippolit Kirillovitch began his speech, trembling with nervousness, with\
cold sweat on his forehead, feeling hot and cold all over by turns. He\
described this himself afterwards. He regarded this speech as his _chef\uc0\u8208 \
d\'92\'9cuvre_, the _chef\uc0\u8208 d\'92\'9cuvre_ of his whole life, as his swan\u8208 song. He died,\
it is true, nine months later of rapid consumption, so that he had the\
right, as it turned out, to compare himself to a swan singing his last\
song. He had put his whole heart and all the brain he had into that\
speech. And poor Ippolit Kirillovitch unexpectedly revealed that at least\
some feeling for the public welfare and \'93the eternal question\'94 lay\
concealed in him. Where his speech really excelled was in its sincerity.\
He genuinely believed in the prisoner\'92s guilt; he was accusing him not as\
an official duty only, and in calling for vengeance he quivered with a\
genuine passion \'93for the security of society.\'94 Even the ladies in the\
audience, though they remained hostile to Ippolit Kirillovitch, admitted\
that he made an extraordinary impression on them. He began in a breaking\
voice, but it soon gained strength and filled the court to the end of his\
speech. But as soon as he had finished, he almost fainted.\
\
\'93Gentlemen of the jury,\'94 began the prosecutor, \'93this case has made a stir\
throughout Russia. But what is there to wonder at, what is there so\
peculiarly horrifying in it for us? We are so accustomed to such crimes!\
That\'92s what\'92s so horrible, that such dark deeds have ceased to horrify us.\
What ought to horrify us is that we are so accustomed to it, and not this\
or that isolated crime. What are the causes of our indifference, our\
lukewarm attitude to such deeds, to such signs of the times, ominous of an\
unenviable future? Is it our cynicism, is it the premature exhaustion of\
intellect and imagination in a society that is sinking into decay, in\
spite of its youth? Is it that our moral principles are shattered to their\
foundations, or is it, perhaps, a complete lack of such principles among\
us? I cannot answer such questions; nevertheless they are disturbing, and\
every citizen not only must, but ought to be harassed by them. Our newborn\
and still timid press has done good service to the public already, for\
without it we should never have heard of the horrors of unbridled violence\
and moral degradation which are continually made known by the press, not\
merely to those who attend the new jury courts established in the present\
reign, but to every one. And what do we read almost daily? Of things\
beside which the present case grows pale, and seems almost commonplace.\
But what is most important is that the majority of our national crimes of\
violence bear witness to a widespread evil, now so general among us that\
it is difficult to contend against it.\
\
\'93One day we see a brilliant young officer of high society, at the very\
outset of his career, in a cowardly underhand way, without a pang of\
conscience, murdering an official who had once been his benefactor, and\
the servant girl, to steal his own I.O.U. and what ready money he could\
find on him; \'91it will come in handy for my pleasures in the fashionable\
world and for my career in the future.\'92 After murdering them, he puts\
pillows under the head of each of his victims; he goes away. Next, a young\
hero \'91decorated for bravery\'92 kills the mother of his chief and benefactor,\
like a highwayman, and to urge his companions to join him he asserts that\
\'91she loves him like a son, and so will follow all his directions and take\
no precautions.\'92 Granted that he is a monster, yet I dare not say in these\
days that he is unique. Another man will not commit the murder, but will\
feel and think like him, and is as dishonorable in soul. In silence, alone\
with his conscience, he asks himself perhaps, \'91What is honor, and isn\'92t\
the condemnation of bloodshed a prejudice?\'92\
\
\'93Perhaps people will cry out against me that I am morbid, hysterical, that\
it is a monstrous slander, that I am exaggerating. Let them say so\'97and\
heavens! I should be the first to rejoice if it were so! Oh, don\'92t believe\
me, think of me as morbid, but remember my words; if only a tenth, if only\
a twentieth part of what I say is true\'97even so it\'92s awful! Look how our\
young people commit suicide, without asking themselves Hamlet\'92s question\
what there is beyond, without a sign of such a question, as though all\
that relates to the soul and to what awaits us beyond the grave had long\
been erased in their minds and buried under the sands. Look at our vice,\
at our profligates. Fyodor Pavlovitch, the luckless victim in the present\
case, was almost an innocent babe compared with many of them. And yet we\
all knew him, \'91he lived among us!\'92...\
\
\'93Yes, one day perhaps the leading intellects of Russia and of Europe will\
study the psychology of Russian crime, for the subject is worth it. But\
this study will come later, at leisure, when all the tragic topsy\uc0\u8208 turvydom\
of to\uc0\u8208 day is farther behind us, so that it\'92s possible to examine it with\
more insight and more impartiality than I can do. Now we are either\
horrified or pretend to be horrified, though we really gloat over the\
spectacle, and love strong and eccentric sensations which tickle our\
cynical, pampered idleness. Or, like little children, we brush the\
dreadful ghosts away and hide our heads in the pillow so as to return to\
our sports and merriment as soon as they have vanished. But we must one\
day begin life in sober earnest, we must look at ourselves as a society;\
it\'92s time we tried to grasp something of our social position, or at least\
to make a beginning in that direction.\
\
\'93A great writer(9) of the last epoch, comparing Russia to a swift troika\
galloping to an unknown goal, exclaims, \'91Oh, troika, birdlike troika, who\
invented thee!\'92 and adds, in proud ecstasy, that all the peoples of the\
world stand aside respectfully to make way for the recklessly galloping\
troika to pass. That may be, they may stand aside, respectfully or no, but\
in my poor opinion the great writer ended his book in this way either in\
an access of childish and na\'efve optimism, or simply in fear of the\
censorship of the day. For if the troika were drawn by his heroes,\
Sobakevitch, Nozdryov, Tchitchikov, it could reach no rational goal,\
whoever might be driving it. And those were the heroes of an older\
generation, ours are worse specimens still....\'94\
\
At this point Ippolit Kirillovitch\'92s speech was interrupted by applause.\
The liberal significance of this simile was appreciated. The applause was,\
it\'92s true, of brief duration, so that the President did not think it\
necessary to caution the public, and only looked severely in the direction\
of the offenders. But Ippolit Kirillovitch was encouraged; he had never\
been applauded before! He had been all his life unable to get a hearing,\
and now he suddenly had an opportunity of securing the ear of all Russia.\
\
\'93What, after all, is this Karamazov family, which has gained such an\
unenviable notoriety throughout Russia?\'94 he continued. \'93Perhaps I am\
exaggerating, but it seems to me that certain fundamental features of the\
educated class of to\uc0\u8208 day are reflected in this family picture\'97only, of\
course, in miniature, \'91like the sun in a drop of water.\'92 Think of that\
unhappy, vicious, unbridled old man, who has met with such a melancholy\
end, the head of a family! Beginning life of noble birth, but in a poor\
dependent position, through an unexpected marriage he came into a small\
fortune. A petty knave, a toady and buffoon, of fairly good, though\
undeveloped, intelligence, he was, above all, a moneylender, who grew\
bolder with growing prosperity. His abject and servile characteristics\
disappeared, his malicious and sarcastic cynicism was all that remained.\
On the spiritual side he was undeveloped, while his vitality was\
excessive. He saw nothing in life but sensual pleasure, and he brought his\
children up to be the same. He had no feelings for his duties as a father.\
He ridiculed those duties. He left his little children to the servants,\
and was glad to be rid of them, forgot about them completely. The old\
man\'92s maxim was _Apr\'e8s moi le d\'e9luge_. He was an example of everything\
that is opposed to civic duty, of the most complete and malignant\
individualism. \'91The world may burn for aught I care, so long as I am all\
right,\'92 and he was all right; he was content, he was eager to go on living\
in the same way for another twenty or thirty years. He swindled his own\
son and spent his money, his maternal inheritance, on trying to get his\
mistress from him. No, I don\'92t intend to leave the prisoner\'92s defense\
altogether to my talented colleague from Petersburg. I will speak the\
truth myself, I can well understand what resentment he had heaped up in\
his son\'92s heart against him.\
\
\'93But enough, enough of that unhappy old man; he has paid the penalty. Let\
us remember, however, that he was a father, and one of the typical fathers\
of to\uc0\u8208 day. Am I unjust, indeed, in saying that he is typical of many\
modern fathers? Alas! many of them only differ in not openly professing\
such cynicism, for they are better educated, more cultured, but their\
philosophy is essentially the same as his. Perhaps I am a pessimist, but\
you have agreed to forgive me. Let us agree beforehand, you need not\
believe me, but let me speak. Let me say what I have to say, and remember\
something of my words.\
\
\'93Now for the children of this father, this head of a family. One of them\
is the prisoner before us, all the rest of my speech will deal with him.\
Of the other two I will speak only cursorily.\
\
\'93The elder is one of those modern young men of brilliant education and\
vigorous intellect, who has lost all faith in everything. He has denied\
and rejected much already, like his father. We have all heard him, he was\
a welcome guest in local society. He never concealed his opinions, quite\
the contrary in fact, which justifies me in speaking rather openly of him\
now, of course, not as an individual, but as a member of the Karamazov\
family. Another personage closely connected with the case died here by his\
own hand last night. I mean an afflicted idiot, formerly the servant, and\
possibly the illegitimate son, of Fyodor Pavlovitch, Smerdyakov. At the\
preliminary inquiry, he told me with hysterical tears how the young Ivan\
Karamazov had horrified him by his spiritual audacity. \'91Everything in the\
world is lawful according to him, and nothing must be forbidden in the\
future\'97that is what he always taught me.\'92 I believe that idiot was driven\
out of his mind by this theory, though, of course, the epileptic attacks\
from which he suffered, and this terrible catastrophe, have helped to\
unhinge his faculties. But he dropped one very interesting observation,\
which would have done credit to a more intelligent observer, and that is,\
indeed, why I\'92ve mentioned it: \'91If there is one of the sons that is like\
Fyodor Pavlovitch in character, it is Ivan Fyodorovitch.\'92\
\
\'93With that remark I conclude my sketch of his character, feeling it\
indelicate to continue further. Oh, I don\'92t want to draw any further\
conclusions and croak like a raven over the young man\'92s future. We\'92ve seen\
to\uc0\u8208 day in this court that there are still good impulses in his young\
heart, that family feeling has not been destroyed in him by lack of faith\
and cynicism, which have come to him rather by inheritance than by the\
exercise of independent thought.\
\
\'93Then the third son. Oh, he is a devout and modest youth, who does not\
share his elder brother\'92s gloomy and destructive theory of life. He has\
sought to cling to the \'91ideas of the people,\'92 or to what goes by that name\
in some circles of our intellectual classes. He clung to the monastery,\
and was within an ace of becoming a monk. He seems to me to have betrayed\
unconsciously, and so early, that timid despair which leads so many in our\
unhappy society, who dread cynicism and its corrupting influences, and\
mistakenly attribute all the mischief to European enlightenment, to return\
to their \'91native soil,\'92 as they say, to the bosom, so to speak, of their\
mother earth, like frightened children, yearning to fall asleep on the\
withered bosom of their decrepit mother, and to sleep there for ever, only\
to escape the horrors that terrify them.\
\
\'93For my part I wish the excellent and gifted young man every success; I\
trust that his youthful idealism and impulse towards the ideas of the\
people may never degenerate, as often happens, on the moral side into\
gloomy mysticism, and on the political into blind chauvinism\'97two elements\
which are even a greater menace to Russia than the premature decay, due to\
misunderstanding and gratuitous adoption of European ideas, from which his\
elder brother is suffering.\'94\
\
Two or three people clapped their hands at the mention of chauvinism and\
mysticism. Ippolit Kirillovitch had been, indeed, carried away by his own\
eloquence. All this had little to do with the case in hand, to say nothing\
of the fact of its being somewhat vague, but the sickly and consumptive\
man was overcome by the desire to express himself once in his life. People\
said afterwards that he was actuated by unworthy motives in his criticism\
of Ivan, because the latter had on one or two occasions got the better of\
him in argument, and Ippolit Kirillovitch, remembering it, tried now to\
take his revenge. But I don\'92t know whether it was true. All this was only\
introductory, however, and the speech passed to more direct consideration\
of the case.\
\
\'93But to return to the eldest son,\'94 Ippolit Kirillovitch went on. \'93He is\
the prisoner before us. We have his life and his actions, too, before us;\
the fatal day has come and all has been brought to the surface. While his\
brothers seem to stand for \'91Europeanism\'92 and \'91the principles of the\
people,\'92 he seems to represent Russia as she is. Oh, not all Russia, not\
all! God preserve us, if it were! Yet, here we have her, our mother\
Russia, the very scent and sound of her. Oh, he is spontaneous, he is a\
marvelous mingling of good and evil, he is a lover of culture and\
Schiller, yet he brawls in taverns and plucks out the beards of his boon\
companions. Oh, he, too, can be good and noble, but only when all goes\
well with him. What is more, he can be carried off his feet, positively\
carried off his feet by noble ideals, but only if they come of themselves,\
if they fall from heaven for him, if they need not be paid for. He\
dislikes paying for anything, but is very fond of receiving, and that\'92s so\
with him in everything. Oh, give him every possible good in life (he\
couldn\'92t be content with less), and put no obstacle in his way, and he\
will show that he, too, can be noble. He is not greedy, no, but he must\
have money, a great deal of money, and you will see how generously, with\
what scorn of filthy lucre, he will fling it all away in the reckless\
dissipation of one night. But if he has not money, he will show what he is\
ready to do to get it when he is in great need of it. But all this later,\
let us take events in their chronological order.\
\
\'93First, we have before us a poor abandoned child, running about the back\uc0\u8208 \
yard \'91without boots on his feet,\'92 as our worthy and esteemed fellow\
citizen, of foreign origin, alas! expressed it just now. I repeat it\
again, I yield to no one the defense of the criminal. I am here to accuse\
him, but to defend him also. Yes, I, too, am human; I, too, can weigh the\
influence of home and childhood on the character. But the boy grows up and\
becomes an officer; for a duel and other reckless conduct he is exiled to\
one of the remote frontier towns of Russia. There he led a wild life as an\
officer. And, of course, he needed money, money before all things, and so\
after prolonged disputes he came to a settlement with his father, and the\
last six thousand was sent him. A letter is in existence in which he\
practically gives up his claim to the rest and settles his conflict with\
his father over the inheritance on the payment of this six thousand.\
\
\'93Then came his meeting with a young girl of lofty character and brilliant\
education. Oh, I do not venture to repeat the details; you have only just\
heard them. Honor, self\uc0\u8208 sacrifice were shown there, and I will be silent.\
The figure of the young officer, frivolous and profligate, doing homage to\
true nobility and a lofty ideal, was shown in a very sympathetic light\
before us. But the other side of the medal was unexpectedly turned to us\
immediately after in this very court. Again I will not venture to\
conjecture why it happened so, but there were causes. The same lady,\
bathed in tears of long\uc0\u8208 concealed indignation, alleged that he, he of all\
men, had despised her for her action, which, though incautious, reckless\
perhaps, was still dictated by lofty and generous motives. He, he, the\
girl\'92s betrothed, looked at her with that smile of mockery, which was more\
insufferable from him than from any one. And knowing that he had already\
deceived her (he had deceived her, believing that she was bound to endure\
everything from him, even treachery), she intentionally offered him three\
thousand roubles, and clearly, too clearly, let him understand that she\
was offering him money to deceive her. \'91Well, will you take it or not, are\
you so lost to shame?\'92 was the dumb question in her scrutinizing eyes. He\
looked at her, saw clearly what was in her mind (he\'92s admitted here before\
you that he understood it all), appropriated that three thousand\
unconditionally, and squandered it in two days with the new object of his\
affections.\
\
\'93What are we to believe then? The first legend of the young officer\
sacrificing his last farthing in a noble impulse of generosity and doing\
reverence to virtue, or this other revolting picture? As a rule, between\
two extremes one has to find the mean, but in the present case this is not\
true. The probability is that in the first case he was genuinely noble,\
and in the second as genuinely base. And why? Because he was of the broad\
Karamazov character\'97that\'92s just what I am leading up to\'97capable of\
combining the most incongruous contradictions, and capable of the greatest\
heights and of the greatest depths. Remember the brilliant remark made by\
a young observer who has seen the Karamazov family at close quarters\'97Mr.\
Rakitin: \'91The sense of their own degradation is as essential to those\
reckless, unbridled natures as the sense of their lofty generosity.\'92 And\
that\'92s true, they need continually this unnatural mixture. Two extremes at\
the same moment, or they are miserable and dissatisfied and their\
existence is incomplete. They are wide, wide as mother Russia; they\
include everything and put up with everything.\
\
\'93By the way, gentlemen of the jury, we\'92ve just touched upon that three\
thousand roubles, and I will venture to anticipate things a little. Can\
you conceive that a man like that, on receiving that sum and in such a\
way, at the price of such shame, such disgrace, such utter degradation,\
could have been capable that very day of setting apart half that sum, that\
very day, and sewing it up in a little bag, and would have had the\
firmness of character to carry it about with him for a whole month\
afterwards, in spite of every temptation and his extreme need of it!\
Neither in drunken debauchery in taverns, nor when he was flying into the\
country, trying to get from God knows whom, the money so essential to him\
to remove the object of his affections from being tempted by his father,\
did he bring himself to touch that little bag! Why, if only to avoid\
abandoning his mistress to the rival of whom he was so jealous, he would\
have been certain to have opened that bag and to have stayed at home to\
keep watch over her, and to await the moment when she would say to him at\
last \'91I am yours,\'92 and to fly with her far from their fatal surroundings.\
\
\'93But no, he did not touch his talisman, and what is the reason he gives\
for it? The chief reason, as I have just said, was that when she would\
say, \'91I am yours, take me where you will,\'92 he might have the wherewithal\
to take her. But that first reason, in the prisoner\'92s own words, was of\
little weight beside the second. While I have that money on me, he said, I\
am a scoundrel, not a thief, for I can always go to my insulted betrothed,\
and, laying down half the sum I have fraudulently appropriated, I can\
always say to her, \'91You see, I\'92ve squandered half your money, and shown I\
am a weak and immoral man, and, if you like, a scoundrel\'92 (I use the\
prisoner\'92s own expressions), \'91but though I am a scoundrel, I am not a\
thief, for if I had been a thief, I shouldn\'92t have brought you back this\
half of the money, but should have taken it as I did the other half!\'92 A\
marvelous explanation! This frantic, but weak man, who could not resist\
the temptation of accepting the three thousand roubles at the price of\
such disgrace, this very man suddenly develops the most stoical firmness,\
and carries about a thousand roubles without daring to touch it. Does that\
fit in at all with the character we have analyzed? No, and I venture to\
tell you how the real Dmitri Karamazov would have behaved in such\
circumstances, if he really had brought himself to put away the money.\
\
\'93At the first temptation\'97for instance, to entertain the woman with whom he\
had already squandered half the money\'97he would have unpicked his little\
bag and have taken out some hundred roubles, for why should he have taken\
back precisely half the money, that is, fifteen hundred roubles? why not\
fourteen hundred? He could just as well have said then that he was not a\
thief, because he brought back fourteen hundred roubles. Then another time\
he would have unpicked it again and taken out another hundred, and then a\
third, and then a fourth, and before the end of the month he would have\
taken the last note but one, feeling that if he took back only a hundred\
it would answer the purpose, for a thief would have stolen it all. And\
then he would have looked at this last note, and have said to himself,\
\'91It\'92s really not worth while to give back one hundred; let\'92s spend that,\
too!\'92 That\'92s how the real Dmitri Karamazov, as we know him, would have\
behaved. One cannot imagine anything more incongruous with the actual fact\
than this legend of the little bag. Nothing could be more inconceivable.\
But we shall return to that later.\'94\
\
After touching upon what had come out in the proceedings concerning the\
financial relations of father and son, and arguing again and again that it\
was utterly impossible, from the facts known, to determine which was in\
the wrong, Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to the evidence of the medical\
experts in reference to Mitya\'92s fixed idea about the three thousand owing\
him.\
\
\
\
Chapter VII. An Historical Survey\
\
\
\'93The medical experts have striven to convince us that the prisoner is out\
of his mind and, in fact, a maniac. I maintain that he is in his right\
mind, and that if he had not been, he would have behaved more cleverly. As\
for his being a maniac, that I would agree with, but only in one point,\
that is, his fixed idea about the three thousand. Yet I think one might\
find a much simpler cause than his tendency to insanity. For my part I\
agree thoroughly with the young doctor who maintained that the prisoner\'92s\
mental faculties have always been normal, and that he has only been\
irritable and exasperated. The object of the prisoner\'92s continual and\
violent anger was not the sum itself; there was a special motive at the\
bottom of it. That motive is jealousy!\'94\
\
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch described at length the prisoner\'92s fatal passion\
for Grushenka. He began from the moment when the prisoner went to the\
\'93young person\'92s\'94 lodgings \'93to beat her\'94\'97\'93I use his own expression,\'94 the\
prosecutor explained\'97\'93but instead of beating her, he remained there, at\
her feet. That was the beginning of the passion. At the same time the\
prisoner\'92s father was captivated by the same young person\'97a strange and\
fatal coincidence, for they both lost their hearts to her simultaneously,\
though both had known her before. And she inspired in both of them the\
most violent, characteristically Karamazov passion. We have her own\
confession: \'91I was laughing at both of them.\'92 Yes, the sudden desire to\
make a jest of them came over her, and she conquered both of them at once.\
The old man, who worshiped money, at once set aside three thousand roubles\
as a reward for one visit from her, but soon after that, he would have\
been happy to lay his property and his name at her feet, if only she would\
become his lawful wife. We have good evidence of this. As for the\
prisoner, the tragedy of his fate is evident; it is before us. But such\
was the young person\'92s \'91game.\'92 The enchantress gave the unhappy young man\
no hope until the last moment, when he knelt before her, stretching out\
hands that were already stained with the blood of his father and rival. It\
was in that position that he was arrested. \'91Send me to Siberia with him, I\
have brought him to this, I am most to blame,\'92 the woman herself cried, in\
genuine remorse at the moment of his arrest.\
\
\'93The talented young man, to whom I have referred already, Mr. Rakitin,\
characterized this heroine in brief and impressive terms: \'91She was\
disillusioned early in life, deceived and ruined by a betrothed, who\
seduced and abandoned her. She was left in poverty, cursed by her\
respectable family, and taken under the protection of a wealthy old man,\
whom she still, however, considers as her benefactor. There was perhaps\
much that was good in her young heart, but it was embittered too early.\
She became prudent and saved money. She grew sarcastic and resentful\
against society.\'92 After this sketch of her character it may well be\
understood that she might laugh at both of them simply from mischief, from\
malice.\
\
\'93After a month of hopeless love and moral degradation, during which he\
betrayed his betrothed and appropriated money entrusted to his honor, the\
prisoner was driven almost to frenzy, almost to madness by continual\
jealousy\'97and of whom? His father! And the worst of it was that the crazy\
old man was alluring and enticing the object of his affection by means of\
that very three thousand roubles, which the son looked upon as his own\
property, part of his inheritance from his mother, of which his father was\
cheating him. Yes, I admit it was hard to bear! It might well drive a man\
to madness. It was not the money, but the fact that this money was used\
with such revolting cynicism to ruin his happiness!\'94\
\
Then the prosecutor went on to describe how the idea of murdering his\
father had entered the prisoner\'92s head, and illustrated his theory with\
facts.\
\
\'93At first he only talked about it in taverns\'97he was talking about it all\
that month. Ah, he likes being always surrounded with company, and he\
likes to tell his companions everything, even his most diabolical and\
dangerous ideas; he likes to share every thought with others, and expects,\
for some reason, that those he confides in will meet him with perfect\
sympathy, enter into all his troubles and anxieties, take his part and not\
oppose him in anything. If not, he flies into a rage and smashes up\
everything in the tavern. [Then followed the anecdote about Captain\
Snegiryov.] Those who heard the prisoner began to think at last that he\
might mean more than threats, and that such a frenzy might turn threats\
into actions.\'94\
\
Here the prosecutor described the meeting of the family at the monastery,\
the conversations with Alyosha, and the horrible scene of violence when\
the prisoner had rushed into his father\'92s house just after dinner.\
\
\'93I cannot positively assert,\'94 the prosecutor continued, \'93that the prisoner\
fully intended to murder his father before that incident. Yet the idea had\
several times presented itself to him, and he had deliberated on it\'97for\
that we have facts, witnesses, and his own words. I confess, gentlemen of\
the jury,\'94 he added, \'93that till to\uc0\u8208 day I have been uncertain whether to\
attribute to the prisoner conscious premeditation. I was firmly convinced\
that he had pictured the fatal moment beforehand, but had only pictured\
it, contemplating it as a possibility. He had not definitely considered\
when and how he might commit the crime.\
\
\'93But I was only uncertain till to\uc0\u8208 day, till that fatal document was\
presented to the court just now. You yourselves heard that young lady\'92s\
exclamation, \'91It is the plan, the program of the murder!\'92 That is how she\
defined that miserable, drunken letter of the unhappy prisoner. And, in\
fact, from that letter we see that the whole fact of the murder was\
premeditated. It was written two days before, and so we know now for a\
fact that, forty\uc0\u8208 eight hours before the perpetration of his terrible\
design, the prisoner swore that, if he could not get money next day, he\
would murder his father in order to take the envelope with the notes from\
under his pillow, as soon as Ivan had left. \'91As soon as Ivan had gone\
away\'92\'97you hear that; so he had thought everything out, weighing every\
circumstance, and he carried it all out just as he had written it. The\
proof of premeditation is conclusive; the crime must have been committed\
for the sake of the money, that is stated clearly, that is written and\
signed. The prisoner does not deny his signature.\
\
\'93I shall be told he was drunk when he wrote it. But that does not diminish\
the value of the letter, quite the contrary; he wrote when drunk what he\
had planned when sober. Had he not planned it when sober, he would not\
have written it when drunk. I shall be asked: Then why did he talk about\
it in taverns? A man who premeditates such a crime is silent and keeps it\
to himself. Yes, but he talked about it before he had formed a plan, when\
he had only the desire, only the impulse to it. Afterwards he talked less\
about it. On the evening he wrote that letter at the \'91Metropolis\'92 tavern,\
contrary to his custom he was silent, though he had been drinking. He did\
not play billiards, he sat in a corner, talked to no one. He did indeed\
turn a shopman out of his seat, but that was done almost unconsciously,\
because he could never enter a tavern without making a disturbance. It is\
true that after he had taken the final decision, he must have felt\
apprehensive that he had talked too much about his design beforehand, and\
that this might lead to his arrest and prosecution afterwards. But there\
was nothing for it; he could not take his words back, but his luck had\
served him before, it would serve him again. He believed in his star, you\
know! I must confess, too, that he did a great deal to avoid the fatal\
catastrophe. \'91To\uc0\u8208 morrow I shall try and borrow the money from every one,\'92\
as he writes in his peculiar language, \'91and if they won\'92t give it to me,\
there will be bloodshed.\'92 \'94\
\
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to a detailed description of all Mitya\'92s\
efforts to borrow the money. He described his visit to Samsonov, his\
journey to Lyagavy. \'93Harassed, jeered at, hungry, after selling his watch\
to pay for the journey (though he tells us he had fifteen hundred roubles\
on him\'97a likely story), tortured by jealousy at having left the object of\
his affections in the town, suspecting that she would go to Fyodor\
Pavlovitch in his absence, he returned at last to the town, to find, to\
his joy, that she had not been near his father. He accompanied her himself\
to her protector. (Strange to say, he doesn\'92t seem to have been jealous of\
Samsonov, which is psychologically interesting.) Then he hastens back to\
his ambush in the back gardens, and there learns that Smerdyakov is in a\
fit, that the other servant is ill\'97the coast is clear and he knows the\
\'91signals\'92\'97what a temptation! Still he resists it; he goes off to a lady\
who has for some time been residing in the town, and who is highly\
esteemed among us, Madame Hohlakov. That lady, who had long watched his\
career with compassion, gave him the most judicious advice, to give up his\
dissipated life, his unseemly love\uc0\u8208 affair, the waste of his youth and\
vigor in pot\uc0\u8208 house debauchery, and to set off to Siberia to the gold\u8208 \
mines: \'91that would be an outlet for your turbulent energies, your romantic\
character, your thirst for adventure.\'92 \'94\
\
After describing the result of this conversation and the moment when the\
prisoner learnt that Grushenka had not remained at Samsonov\'92s, the sudden\
frenzy of the luckless man worn out with jealousy and nervous exhaustion,\
at the thought that she had deceived him and was now with his father,\
Ippolit Kirillovitch concluded by dwelling upon the fatal influence of\
chance. \'93Had the maid told him that her mistress was at Mokroe with her\
former lover, nothing would have happened. But she lost her head, she\
could only swear and protest her ignorance, and if the prisoner did not\
kill her on the spot, it was only because he flew in pursuit of his false\
mistress.\
\
\'93But note, frantic as he was, he took with him a brass pestle. Why that?\
Why not some other weapon? But since he had been contemplating his plan\
and preparing himself for it for a whole month, he would snatch up\
anything like a weapon that caught his eye. He had realized for a month\
past that any object of the kind would serve as a weapon, so he instantly,\
without hesitation, recognized that it would serve his purpose. So it was\
by no means unconsciously, by no means involuntarily, that he snatched up\
that fatal pestle. And then we find him in his father\'92s garden\'97the coast\
is clear, there are no witnesses, darkness and jealousy. The suspicion\
that she was there, with him, with his rival, in his arms, and perhaps\
laughing at him at that moment\'97took his breath away. And it was not mere\
suspicion, the deception was open, obvious. She must be there, in that\
lighted room, she must be behind the screen; and the unhappy man would\
have us believe that he stole up to the window, peeped respectfully in,\
and discreetly withdrew, for fear something terrible and immoral should\
happen. And he tries to persuade us of that, us, who understand his\
character, who know his state of mind at the moment, and that he knew the\
signals by which he could at once enter the house.\'94 At this point Ippolit\
Kirillovitch broke off to discuss exhaustively the suspected connection of\
Smerdyakov with the murder. He did this very circumstantially, and every\
one realized that, although he professed to despise that suspicion, he\
thought the subject of great importance.\
\
\
\
Chapter VIII. A Treatise On Smerdyakov\
\
\
\'93To begin with, what was the source of this suspicion?\'94 (Ippolit\
Kirillovitch began.) \'93The first person who cried out that Smerdyakov had\
committed the murder was the prisoner himself at the moment of his arrest,\
yet from that time to this he had not brought forward a single fact to\
confirm the charge, nor the faintest suggestion of a fact. The charge is\
confirmed by three persons only\'97the two brothers of the prisoner and\
Madame Svyetlov. The elder of these brothers expressed his suspicions only\
to\uc0\u8208 day, when he was undoubtedly suffering from brain fever. But we know\
that for the last two months he has completely shared our conviction of\
his brother\'92s guilt and did not attempt to combat that idea. But of that\
later. The younger brother has admitted that he has not the slightest fact\
to support his notion of Smerdyakov\'92s guilt, and has only been led to that\
conclusion from the prisoner\'92s own words and the expression of his face.\
Yes, that astounding piece of evidence has been brought forward twice to\uc0\u8208 \
day by him. Madame Svyetlov was even more astounding. \'91What the prisoner\
tells you, you must believe; he is not a man to tell a lie.\'92 That is all\
the evidence against Smerdyakov produced by these three persons, who are\
all deeply concerned in the prisoner\'92s fate. And yet the theory of\
Smerdyakov\'92s guilt has been noised about, has been and is still\
maintained. Is it credible? Is it conceivable?\'94\
\
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch thought it necessary to describe the personality\
of Smerdyakov, \'93who had cut short his life in a fit of insanity.\'94 He\
depicted him as a man of weak intellect, with a smattering of education,\
who had been thrown off his balance by philosophical ideas above his level\
and certain modern theories of duty, which he learnt in practice from the\
reckless life of his master, who was also perhaps his father\'97Fyodor\
Pavlovitch; and, theoretically, from various strange philosophical\
conversations with his master\'92s elder son, Ivan Fyodorovitch, who readily\
indulged in this diversion, probably feeling dull or wishing to amuse\
himself at the valet\'92s expense. \'93He spoke to me himself of his spiritual\
condition during the last few days at his father\'92s house,\'94 Ippolit\
Kirillovitch explained; \'93but others too have borne witness to it\'97the\
prisoner himself, his brother, and the servant Grigory\'97that is, all who\
knew him well.\
\
\'93Moreover, Smerdyakov, whose health was shaken by his attacks of epilepsy,\
had not the courage of a chicken. \'91He fell at my feet and kissed them,\'92\
the prisoner himself has told us, before he realized how damaging such a\
statement was to himself. \'91He is an epileptic chicken,\'92 he declared about\
him in his characteristic language. And the prisoner chose him for his\
confidant (we have his own word for it) and he frightened him into\
consenting at last to act as a spy for him. In that capacity he deceived\
his master, revealing to the prisoner the existence of the envelope with\
the notes in it and the signals by means of which he could get into the\
house. How could he help telling him, indeed? \'91He would have killed me, I\
could see that he would have killed me,\'92 he said at the inquiry, trembling\
and shaking even before us, though his tormentor was by that time arrested\
and could do him no harm. \'91He suspected me at every instant. In fear and\
trembling I hastened to tell him every secret to pacify him, that he might\
see that I had not deceived him and let me off alive.\'92 Those are his own\
words. I wrote them down and I remember them. \'91When he began shouting at\
me, I would fall on my knees.\'92\
\
\'93He was naturally very honest and enjoyed the complete confidence of his\
master, ever since he had restored him some money he had lost. So it may\
be supposed that the poor fellow suffered pangs of remorse at having\
deceived his master, whom he loved as his benefactor. Persons severely\
afflicted with epilepsy are, so the most skillful doctors tell us, always\
prone to continual and morbid self\uc0\u8208 reproach. They worry over their\
\'91wickedness,\'92 they are tormented by pangs of conscience, often entirely\
without cause; they exaggerate and often invent all sorts of faults and\
crimes. And here we have a man of that type who had really been driven to\
wrong\uc0\u8208 doing by terror and intimidation.\
\
\'93He had, besides, a strong presentiment that something terrible would be\
the outcome of the situation that was developing before his eyes. When\
Ivan Fyodorovitch was leaving for Moscow, just before the catastrophe,\
Smerdyakov besought him to remain, though he was too timid to tell him\
plainly what he feared. He confined himself to hints, but his hints were\
not understood.\
\
\'93It must be observed that he looked on Ivan Fyodorovitch as a protector,\
whose presence in the house was a guarantee that no harm would come to\
pass. Remember the phrase in Dmitri Karamazov\'92s drunken letter, \'91I shall\
kill the old man, if only Ivan goes away.\'92 So Ivan Fyodorovitch\'92s presence\
seemed to every one a guarantee of peace and order in the house.\
\
\'93But he went away, and within an hour of his young master\'92s departure\
Smerdyakov was taken with an epileptic fit. But that\'92s perfectly\
intelligible. Here I must mention that Smerdyakov, oppressed by terror and\
despair of a sort, had felt during those last few days that one of the\
fits from which he had suffered before at moments of strain, might be\
coming upon him again. The day and hour of such an attack cannot, of\
course, be foreseen, but every epileptic can feel beforehand that he is\
likely to have one. So the doctors tell us. And so, as soon as Ivan\
Fyodorovitch had driven out of the yard, Smerdyakov, depressed by his\
lonely and unprotected position, went to the cellar. He went down the\
stairs wondering if he would have a fit or not, and what if it were to\
come upon him at once. And that very apprehension, that very wonder,\
brought on the spasm in his throat that always precedes such attacks, and\
he fell unconscious into the cellar. And in this perfectly natural\
occurrence people try to detect a suspicion, a hint that he was shamming\
an attack _on purpose_. But, if it were on purpose, the question arises at\
once, what was his motive? What was he reckoning on? What was he aiming\
at? I say nothing about medicine: science, I am told, may go astray: the\
doctors were not able to discriminate between the counterfeit and the\
real. That may be so, but answer me one question: what motive had he for\
such a counterfeit? Could he, had he been plotting the murder, have\
desired to attract the attention of the household by having a fit just\
before?\
\
\'93You see, gentlemen of the jury, on the night of the murder, there were\
five persons in Fyodor Pavlovitch\'92s\'97Fyodor Pavlovitch himself (but he did\
not kill himself, that\'92s evident); then his servant, Grigory, but he was\
almost killed himself; the third person was Grigory\'92s wife, Marfa\
Ignatyevna, but it would be simply shameful to imagine her murdering her\
master. Two persons are left\'97the prisoner and Smerdyakov. But, if we are\
to believe the prisoner\'92s statement that he is not the murderer, then\
Smerdyakov must have been, for there is no other alternative, no one else\
can be found. That is what accounts for the artful, astounding accusation\
against the unhappy idiot who committed suicide yesterday. Had a shadow of\
suspicion rested on any one else, had there been any sixth person, I am\
persuaded that even the prisoner would have been ashamed to accuse\
Smerdyakov, and would have accused that sixth person, for to charge\
Smerdyakov with that murder is perfectly absurd.\
\
\'93Gentlemen, let us lay aside psychology, let us lay aside medicine, let us\
even lay aside logic, let us turn only to the facts and see what the facts\
tell us. If Smerdyakov killed him, how did he do it? Alone or with the\
assistance of the prisoner? Let us consider the first alternative\'97that he\
did it alone. If he had killed him it must have been with some object, for\
some advantage to himself. But not having a shadow of the motive that the\
prisoner had for the murder\'97hatred, jealousy, and so on\'97Smerdyakov could\
only have murdered him for the sake of gain, in order to appropriate the\
three thousand roubles he had seen his master put in the envelope. And yet\
he tells another person\'97and a person most closely interested, that is, the\
prisoner\'97everything about the money and the signals, where the envelope\
lay, what was written on it, what it was tied up with, and, above all,\
told him of those signals by which he could enter the house. Did he do\
this simply to betray himself, or to invite to the same enterprise one who\
would be anxious to get that envelope for himself? \'91Yes,\'92 I shall be told,\
\'91but he betrayed it from fear.\'92 But how do you explain this? A man who\
could conceive such an audacious, savage act, and carry it out, tells\
facts which are known to no one else in the world, and which, if he held\
his tongue, no one would ever have guessed!\
\
\'93No, however cowardly he might be, if he had plotted such a crime, nothing\
would have induced him to tell any one about the envelope and the signals,\
for that was as good as betraying himself beforehand. He would have\
invented something, he would have told some lie if he had been forced to\
give information, but he would have been silent about that. For, on the\
other hand, if he had said nothing about the money, but had committed the\
murder and stolen the money, no one in the world could have charged him\
with murder for the sake of robbery, since no one but he had seen the\
money, no one but he knew of its existence in the house. Even if he had\
been accused of the murder, it could only have been thought that he had\
committed it from some other motive. But since no one had observed any\
such motive in him beforehand, and every one saw, on the contrary, that\
his master was fond of him and honored him with his confidence, he would,\
of course, have been the last to be suspected. People would have suspected\
first the man who had a motive, a man who had himself declared he had such\
motives, who had made no secret of it; they would, in fact, have suspected\
the son of the murdered man, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. Had Smerdyakov killed\
and robbed him, and the son been accused of it, that would, of course,\
have suited Smerdyakov. Yet are we to believe that, though plotting the\
murder, he told that son, Dmitri, about the money, the envelope, and the\
signals? Is that logical? Is that clear?\
\
\'93When the day of the murder planned by Smerdyakov came, we have him\
falling downstairs in a _feigned_ fit\'97with what object? In the first place\
that Grigory, who had been intending to take his medicine, might put it\
off and remain on guard, seeing there was no one to look after the house,\
and, in the second place, I suppose, that his master seeing that there was\
no one to guard him, and in terror of a visit from his son, might redouble\
his vigilance and precaution. And, most of all, I suppose that he,\
Smerdyakov, disabled by the fit, might be carried from the kitchen, where\
he always slept, apart from all the rest, and where he could go in and out\
as he liked, to Grigory\'92s room at the other end of the lodge, where he was\
always put, shut off by a screen three paces from their own bed. This was\
the immemorial custom established by his master and the kind\uc0\u8208 hearted Marfa\
Ignatyevna, whenever he had a fit. There, lying behind the screen, he\
would most likely, to keep up the sham, have begun groaning, and so\
keeping them awake all night (as Grigory and his wife testified). And all\
this, we are to believe, that he might more conveniently get up and murder\
his master!\
\
\'93But I shall be told that he shammed illness on purpose that he might not\
be suspected and that he told the prisoner of the money and the signals to\
tempt him to commit the murder, and when he had murdered him and had gone\
away with the money, making a noise, most likely, and waking people,\
Smerdyakov got up, am I to believe, and went in\'97what for? To murder his\
master a second time and carry off the money that had already been stolen?\
Gentlemen, are you laughing? I am ashamed to put forward such suggestions,\
but, incredible as it seems, that\'92s just what the prisoner alleges. When\
he had left the house, had knocked Grigory down and raised an alarm, he\
tells us Smerdyakov got up, went in and murdered his master and stole the\
money! I won\'92t press the point that Smerdyakov could hardly have reckoned\
on this beforehand, and have foreseen that the furious and exasperated son\
would simply come to peep in respectfully, though he knew the signals, and\
beat a retreat, leaving Smerdyakov his booty. Gentlemen of the jury, I put\
this question to you in earnest; when was the moment when Smerdyakov could\
have committed his crime? Name that moment, or you can\'92t accuse him.\
\
\'93But, perhaps, the fit was a real one, the sick man suddenly recovered,\
heard a shout, and went out. Well\'97what then? He looked about him and said,\
\'91Why not go and kill the master?\'92 And how did he know what had happened,\
since he had been lying unconscious till that moment? But there\'92s a limit\
to these flights of fancy.\
\
\'93 \'91Quite so,\'92 some astute people will tell me, \'91but what if they were in\
agreement? What if they murdered him together and shared the money\'97what\
then?\'92 A weighty question, truly! And the facts to confirm it are\
astounding. One commits the murder and takes all the trouble while his\
accomplice lies on one side shamming a fit, apparently to arouse suspicion\
in every one, alarm in his master and alarm in Grigory. It would be\
interesting to know what motives could have induced the two accomplices to\
form such an insane plan.\
\
\'93But perhaps it was not a case of active complicity on Smerdyakov\'92s part,\
but only of passive acquiescence; perhaps Smerdyakov was intimidated and\
agreed not to prevent the murder, and foreseeing that he would be blamed\
for letting his master be murdered, without screaming for help or\
resisting, he may have obtained permission from Dmitri Karamazov to get\
out of the way by shamming a fit\'97\'91you may murder him as you like; it\'92s\
nothing to me.\'92 But as this attack of Smerdyakov\'92s was bound to throw the\
household into confusion, Dmitri Karamazov could never have agreed to such\
a plan. I will waive that point however. Supposing that he did agree, it\
would still follow that Dmitri Karamazov is the murderer and the\
instigator, and Smerdyakov is only a passive accomplice, and not even an\
accomplice, but merely acquiesced against his will through terror.\
\
\'93But what do we see? As soon as he is arrested the prisoner instantly\
throws all the blame on Smerdyakov, not accusing him of being his\
accomplice, but of being himself the murderer. \'91He did it alone,\'92 he says.\
\'91He murdered and robbed him. It was the work of his hands.\'92 Strange sort\
of accomplices who begin to accuse one another at once! And think of the\
risk for Karamazov. After committing the murder while his accomplice lay\
in bed, he throws the blame on the invalid, who might well have resented\
it and in self\uc0\u8208 preservation might well have confessed the truth. For he\
might well have seen that the court would at once judge how far he was\
responsible, and so he might well have reckoned that if he were punished,\
it would be far less severely than the real murderer. But in that case he\
would have been certain to make a confession, yet he has not done so.\
Smerdyakov never hinted at their complicity, though the actual murderer\
persisted in accusing him and declaring that he had committed the crime\
alone.\
\
\'93What\'92s more, Smerdyakov at the inquiry volunteered the statement that it\
was _he_ who had told the prisoner of the envelope of notes and of the\
signals, and that, but for him, he would have known nothing about them. If\
he had really been a guilty accomplice, would he so readily have made this\
statement at the inquiry? On the contrary, he would have tried to conceal\
it, to distort the facts or minimize them. But he was far from distorting\
or minimizing them. No one but an innocent man, who had no fear of being\
charged with complicity, could have acted as he did. And in a fit of\
melancholy arising from his disease and this catastrophe he hanged himself\
yesterday. He left a note written in his peculiar language, \'91I destroy\
myself of my own will and inclination so as to throw no blame on any one.\'92\
What would it have cost him to add: \'91I am the murderer, not Karamazov\'92?\
But that he did not add. Did his conscience lead him to suicide and not to\
avowing his guilt?\
\
\'93And what followed? Notes for three thousand roubles were brought into the\
court just now, and we were told that they were the same that lay in the\
envelope now on the table before us, and that the witness had received\
them from Smerdyakov the day before. But I need not recall the painful\
scene, though I will make one or two comments, selecting such trivial ones\
as might not be obvious at first sight to every one, and so may be\
overlooked. In the first place, Smerdyakov must have given back the money\
and hanged himself yesterday from remorse. And only yesterday he confessed\
his guilt to Ivan Karamazov, as the latter informs us. If it were not so,\
indeed, why should Ivan Fyodorovitch have kept silence till now? And so,\
if he has confessed, then why, I ask again, did he not avow the whole\
truth in the last letter he left behind, knowing that the innocent\
prisoner had to face this terrible ordeal the next day?\
\
\'93The money alone is no proof. A week ago, quite by chance, the fact came\
to the knowledge of myself and two other persons in this court that Ivan\
Fyodorovitch had sent two five per cent. coupons of five thousand\
each\'97that is, ten thousand in all\'97to the chief town of the province to be\
changed. I only mention this to point out that any one may have money, and\
that it can\'92t be proved that these notes are the same as were in Fyodor\
Pavlovitch\'92s envelope.\
\
\'93Ivan Karamazov, after receiving yesterday a communication of such\
importance from the real murderer, did not stir. Why didn\'92t he report it\
at once? Why did he put it all off till morning? I think I have a right to\
conjecture why. His health had been giving way for a week past: he had\
admitted to a doctor and to his most intimate friends that he was\
suffering from hallucinations and seeing phantoms of the dead: he was on\
the eve of the attack of brain fever by which he has been stricken down\
to\uc0\u8208 day. In this condition he suddenly heard of Smerdyakov\'92s death, and at\
once reflected, \'91The man is dead, I can throw the blame on him and save my\
brother. I have money. I will take a roll of notes and say that Smerdyakov\
gave them me before his death.\'92 You will say that was dishonorable: it\'92s\
dishonorable to slander even the dead, and even to save a brother. True,\
but what if he slandered him unconsciously? What if, finally unhinged by\
the sudden news of the valet\'92s death, he imagined it really was so? You\
saw the recent scene: you have seen the witness\'92s condition. He was\
standing up and was speaking, but where was his mind?\
\
\'93Then followed the document, the prisoner\'92s letter written two days before\
the crime, and containing a complete program of the murder. Why, then, are\
we looking for any other program? The crime was committed precisely\
according to this program, and by no other than the writer of it. Yes,\
gentlemen of the jury, it went off without a hitch! He did not run\
respectfully and timidly away from his father\'92s window, though he was\
firmly convinced that the object of his affections was with him. No, that\
is absurd and unlikely! He went in and murdered him. Most likely he killed\
him in anger, burning with resentment, as soon as he looked on his hated\
rival. But having killed him, probably with one blow of the brass pestle,\
and having convinced himself, after careful search, that she was not\
there, he did not, however, forget to put his hand under the pillow and\
take out the envelope, the torn cover of which lies now on the table\
before us.\
\
\'93I mention this fact that you may note one, to my thinking, very\
characteristic circumstance. Had he been an experienced murderer and had\
he committed the murder for the sake of gain only, would he have left the\
torn envelope on the floor as it was found, beside the corpse? Had it been\
Smerdyakov, for instance, murdering his master to rob him, he would have\
simply carried away the envelope with him, without troubling himself to\
open it over his victim\'92s corpse, for he would have known for certain that\
the notes were in the envelope\'97they had been put in and sealed up in his\
presence\'97and had he taken the envelope with him, no one would ever have\
known of the robbery. I ask you, gentlemen, would Smerdyakov have behaved\
in that way? Would he have left the envelope on the floor?\
\
\'93No, this was the action of a frantic murderer, a murderer who was not a\
thief and had never stolen before that day, who snatched the notes from\
under the pillow, not like a thief stealing them, but as though seizing\
his own property from the thief who had stolen it. For that was the idea\
which had become almost an insane obsession in Dmitri Karamazov in regard\
to that money. And pouncing upon the envelope, which he had never seen\
before, he tore it open to make sure whether the money was in it, and ran\
away with the money in his pocket, even forgetting to consider that he had\
left an astounding piece of evidence against himself in that torn envelope\
on the floor. All because it was Karamazov, not Smerdyakov, he didn\'92t\
think, he didn\'92t reflect, and how should he? He ran away; he heard behind\
him the servant cry out; the old man caught him, stopped him and was\
felled to the ground by the brass pestle.\
\
\'93The prisoner, moved by pity, leapt down to look at him. Would you believe\
it, he tells us that he leapt down out of pity, out of compassion, to see\
whether he could do anything for him. Was that a moment to show\
compassion? No; he jumped down simply to make certain whether the only\
witness of his crime were dead or alive. Any other feeling, any other\
motive would be unnatural. Note that he took trouble over Grigory, wiped\
his head with his handkerchief and, convincing himself he was dead, he ran\
to the house of his mistress, dazed and covered with blood. How was it he\
never thought that he was covered with blood and would be at once\
detected? But the prisoner himself assures us that he did not even notice\
that he was covered with blood. That may be believed, that is very\
possible, that always happens at such moments with criminals. On one point\
they will show diabolical cunning, while another will escape them\
altogether. But he was thinking at that moment of one thing only\'97where was\
_she_? He wanted to find out at once where she was, so he ran to her\
lodging and learnt an unexpected and astounding piece of news\'97she had gone\
off to Mokroe to meet her first lover.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter IX. The Galloping Troika. The End Of The Prosecutor\'92s Speech.\
\
\
Ippolit Kirillovitch had chosen the historical method of exposition,\
beloved by all nervous orators, who find in its limitation a check on\
their own eager rhetoric. At this moment in his speech he went off into a\
dissertation on Grushenka\'92s \'93first lover,\'94 and brought forward several\
interesting thoughts on this theme.\
\
\'93Karamazov, who had been frantically jealous of every one, collapsed, so\
to speak, and effaced himself at once before this first lover. What makes\
it all the more strange is that he seems to have hardly thought of this\
formidable rival. But he had looked upon him as a remote danger, and\
Karamazov always lives in the present. Possibly he regarded him as a\
fiction. But his wounded heart grasped instantly that the woman had been\
concealing this new rival and deceiving him, because he was anything but a\
fiction to her, because he was the one hope of her life. Grasping this\
instantly, he resigned himself.\
\
\'93Gentlemen of the jury, I cannot help dwelling on this unexpected trait in\
the prisoner\'92s character. He suddenly evinces an irresistible desire for\
justice, a respect for woman and a recognition of her right to love. And\
all this at the very moment when he had stained his hands with his\
father\'92s blood for her sake! It is true that the blood he had shed was\
already crying out for vengeance, for, after having ruined his soul and\
his life in this world, he was forced to ask himself at that same instant\
what he was and what he could be now to her, to that being, dearer to him\
than his own soul, in comparison with that former lover who had returned\
penitent, with new love, to the woman he had once betrayed, with honorable\
offers, with the promise of a reformed and happy life. And he, luckless\
man, what could he give her now, what could he offer her?\
\
\'93Karamazov felt all this, knew that all ways were barred to him by his\
crime and that he was a criminal under sentence, and not a man with life\
before him! This thought crushed him. And so he instantly flew to one\
frantic plan, which, to a man of Karamazov\'92s character, must have appeared\
the one inevitable way out of his terrible position. That way out was\
suicide. He ran for the pistols he had left in pledge with his friend\
Perhotin and on the way, as he ran, he pulled out of his pocket the money,\
for the sake of which he had stained his hands with his father\'92s gore. Oh,\
now he needed money more than ever. Karamazov would die, Karamazov would\
shoot himself and it should be remembered! To be sure, he was a poet and\
had burnt the candle at both ends all his life. \'91To her, to her! and\
there, oh, there I will give a feast to the whole world, such as never was\
before, that will be remembered and talked of long after! In the midst of\
shouts of wild merriment, reckless gypsy songs and dances I shall raise\
the glass and drink to the woman I adore and her new\uc0\u8208 found happiness! And\
then, on the spot, at her feet, I shall dash out my brains before her and\
punish myself! She will remember Mitya Karamazov sometimes, she will see\
how Mitya loved her, she will feel for Mitya!\'92\
\
\'93Here we see in excess a love of effect, a romantic despair and\
sentimentality, and the wild recklessness of the Karamazovs. Yes, but\
there is something else, gentlemen of the jury, something that cries out\
in the soul, throbs incessantly in the mind, and poisons the heart unto\
death\'97that _something_ is conscience, gentlemen of the jury, its judgment,\
its terrible torments! The pistol will settle everything, the pistol is\
the only way out! But _beyond_\'97I don\'92t know whether Karamazov wondered at\
that moment \'91What lies beyond,\'92 and whether Karamazov could, like Hamlet,\
wonder \'91What lies beyond.\'92 No, gentlemen of the jury, they have their\
Hamlets, but we still have our Karamazovs!\'94\
\
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch drew a minute picture of Mitya\'92s preparations,\
the scene at Perhotin\'92s, at the shop, with the drivers. He quoted numerous\
words and actions, confirmed by witnesses, and the picture made a terrible\
impression on the audience. The guilt of this harassed and desperate man\
stood out clear and convincing, when the facts were brought together.\
\
\'93What need had he of precaution? Two or three times he almost confessed,\
hinted at it, all but spoke out.\'94 (Then followed the evidence given by\
witnesses.) \'93He even cried out to the peasant who drove him, \'91Do you know,\
you are driving a murderer!\'92 But it was impossible for him to speak out,\
he had to get to Mokroe and there to finish his romance. But what was\
awaiting the luckless man? Almost from the first minute at Mokroe he saw\
that his invincible rival was perhaps by no means so invincible, that the\
toast to their new\uc0\u8208 found happiness was not desired and would not be\
acceptable. But you know the facts, gentlemen of the jury, from the\
preliminary inquiry. Karamazov\'92s triumph over his rival was complete and\
his soul passed into quite a new phase, perhaps the most terrible phase\
through which his soul has passed or will pass.\
\
\'93One may say with certainty, gentlemen of the jury,\'94 the prosecutor\
continued, \'93that outraged nature and the criminal heart bring their own\
vengeance more completely than any earthly justice. What\'92s more, justice\
and punishment on earth positively alleviate the punishment of nature and\
are, indeed, essential to the soul of the criminal at such moments, as its\
salvation from despair. For I cannot imagine the horror and moral\
suffering of Karamazov when he learnt that she loved him, that for his\
sake she had rejected her first lover, that she was summoning him, Mitya,\
to a new life, that she was promising him happiness\'97and when? When\
everything was over for him and nothing was possible!\
\
\'93By the way, I will note in parenthesis a point of importance for the\
light it throws on the prisoner\'92s position at the moment. This woman, this\
love of his, had been till the last moment, till the very instant of his\
arrest, a being unattainable, passionately desired by him but\
unattainable. Yet why did he not shoot himself then, why did he relinquish\
his design and even forget where his pistol was? It was just that\
passionate desire for love and the hope of satisfying it that restrained\
him. Throughout their revels he kept close to his adored mistress, who was\
at the banquet with him and was more charming and fascinating to him than\
ever\'97he did not leave her side, abasing himself in his homage before her.\
\
\'93His passion might well, for a moment, stifle not only the fear of arrest,\
but even the torments of conscience. For a moment, oh, only for a moment!\
I can picture the state of mind of the criminal hopelessly enslaved by\
these influences\'97first, the influence of drink, of noise and excitement,\
of the thud of the dance and the scream of the song, and of her, flushed\
with wine, singing and dancing and laughing to him! Secondly, the hope in\
the background that the fatal end might still be far off, that not till\
next morning, at least, they would come and take him. So he had a few\
hours and that\'92s much, very much! In a few hours one can think of many\
things. I imagine that he felt something like what criminals feel when\
they are being taken to the scaffold. They have another long, long street\
to pass down and at walking pace, past thousands of people. Then there\
will be a turning into another street and only at the end of that street\
the dread place of execution! I fancy that at the beginning of the journey\
the condemned man, sitting on his shameful cart, must feel that he has\
infinite life still before him. The houses recede, the cart moves on\'97oh,\
that\'92s nothing, it\'92s still far to the turning into the second street and\
he still looks boldly to right and to left at those thousands of callously\
curious people with their eyes fixed on him, and he still fancies that he\
is just such a man as they. But now the turning comes to the next street.\
Oh, that\'92s nothing, nothing, there\'92s still a whole street before him, and\
however many houses have been passed, he will still think there are many\
left. And so to the very end, to the very scaffold.\
\
\'93This I imagine is how it was with Karamazov then. \'91They\'92ve not had time\
yet,\'92 he must have thought, \'91I may still find some way out, oh, there\'92s\
still time to make some plan of defense, and now, now\'97she is so\
fascinating!\'92\
\
\'93His soul was full of confusion and dread, but he managed, however, to put\
aside half his money and hide it somewhere\'97I cannot otherwise explain the\
disappearance of quite half of the three thousand he had just taken from\
his father\'92s pillow. He had been in Mokroe more than once before, he had\
caroused there for two days together already, he knew the old big house\
with all its passages and outbuildings. I imagine that part of the money\
was hidden in that house, not long before the arrest, in some crevice,\
under some floor, in some corner, under the roof. With what object? I\
shall be asked. Why, the catastrophe may take place at once, of course; he\
hadn\'92t yet considered how to meet it, he hadn\'92t the time, his head was\
throbbing and his heart was with _her_, but money\'97money was indispensable\
in any case! With money a man is always a man. Perhaps such foresight at\
such a moment may strike you as unnatural? But he assures us himself that\
a month before, at a critical and exciting moment, he had halved his money\
and sewn it up in a little bag. And though that was not true, as we shall\
prove directly, it shows the idea was a familiar one to Karamazov, he had\
contemplated it. What\'92s more, when he declared at the inquiry that he had\
put fifteen hundred roubles in a bag (which never existed) he may have\
invented that little bag on the inspiration of the moment, because he had\
two hours before divided his money and hidden half of it at Mokroe till\
morning, in case of emergency, simply not to have it on himself. Two\
extremes, gentlemen of the jury, remember that Karamazov can contemplate\
two extremes and both at once.\
\
\'93We have looked in the house, but we haven\'92t found the money. It may still\
be there or it may have disappeared next day and be in the prisoner\'92s\
hands now. In any case he was at her side, on his knees before her, she\
was lying on the bed, he had his hands stretched out to her and he had so\
entirely forgotten everything that he did not even hear the men coming to\
arrest him. He hadn\'92t time to prepare any line of defense in his mind. He\
was caught unawares and confronted with his judges, the arbiters of his\
destiny.\
\
\'93Gentlemen of the jury, there are moments in the execution of our duties\
when it is terrible for us to face a man, terrible on his account, too!\
The moments of contemplating that animal fear, when the criminal sees that\
all is lost, but still struggles, still means to struggle, the moments\
when every instinct of self\uc0\u8208 preservation rises up in him at once and he\
looks at you with questioning and suffering eyes, studies you, your face,\
your thoughts, uncertain on which side you will strike, and his distracted\
mind frames thousands of plans in an instant, but he is still afraid to\
speak, afraid of giving himself away! This purgatory of the spirit, this\
animal thirst for self\uc0\u8208 preservation, these humiliating moments of the\
human soul, are awful, and sometimes arouse horror and compassion for the\
criminal even in the lawyer. And this was what we all witnessed then.\
\
\'93At first he was thunderstruck and in his terror dropped some very\
compromising phrases. \'91Blood! I\'92ve deserved it!\'92 But he quickly restrained\
himself. He had not prepared what he was to say, what answer he was to\
make, he had nothing but a bare denial ready. \'91I am not guilty of my\
father\'92s death.\'92 That was his fence for the moment and behind it he hoped\
to throw up a barricade of some sort. His first compromising exclamations\
he hastened to explain by declaring that he was responsible for the death\
of the servant Grigory only. \'91Of that bloodshed I am guilty, but who has\
killed my father, gentlemen, who has killed him? Who can have killed him,\
_if not I_?\'92 Do you hear, he asked us that, us, who had come to ask him\
that question! Do you hear that phrase uttered with such premature\
haste\'97\'91if not I\'92\'97the animal cunning, the na\'efvet\'e9, the Karamazov impatience\
of it? \'91I didn\'92t kill him and you mustn\'92t think I did! I wanted to kill\
him, gentlemen, I wanted to kill him,\'92 he hastens to admit (he was in a\
hurry, in a terrible hurry), \'91but still I am not guilty, it is not I\
murdered him.\'92 He concedes to us that he wanted to murder him, as though\
to say, you can see for yourselves how truthful I am, so you\'92ll believe\
all the sooner that I didn\'92t murder him. Oh, in such cases the criminal is\
often amazingly shallow and credulous.\
\
\'93At that point one of the lawyers asked him, as it were incidentally, the\
most simple question, \'91Wasn\'92t it Smerdyakov killed him?\'92 Then, as we\
expected, he was horribly angry at our having anticipated him and caught\
him unawares, before he had time to pave the way to choose and snatch the\
moment when it would be most natural to bring in Smerdyakov\'92s name. He\
rushed at once to the other extreme, as he always does, and began to\
assure us that Smerdyakov could not have killed him, was not capable of\
it. But don\'92t believe him, that was only his cunning; he didn\'92t really\
give up the idea of Smerdyakov; on the contrary, he meant to bring him\
forward again; for, indeed, he had no one else to bring forward, but he\
would do that later, because for the moment that line was spoiled for him.\
He would bring him forward perhaps next day, or even a few days later,\
choosing an opportunity to cry out to us, \'91You know I was more skeptical\
about Smerdyakov than you, you remember that yourselves, but now I am\
convinced. He killed him, he must have done!\'92 And for the present he falls\
back upon a gloomy and irritable denial. Impatience and anger prompted\
him, however, to the most inept and incredible explanation of how he\
looked into his father\'92s window and how he respectfully withdrew. The\
worst of it was that he was unaware of the position of affairs, of the\
evidence given by Grigory.\
\
\'93We proceeded to search him. The search angered, but encouraged him, the\
whole three thousand had not been found on him, only half of it. And no\
doubt only at that moment of angry silence, the fiction of the little bag\
first occurred to him. No doubt he was conscious himself of the\
improbability of the story and strove painfully to make it sound more\
likely, to weave it into a romance that would sound plausible. In such\
cases the first duty, the chief task of the investigating lawyers, is to\
prevent the criminal being prepared, to pounce upon him unexpectedly so\
that he may blurt out his cherished ideas in all their simplicity,\
improbability and inconsistency. The criminal can only be made to speak by\
the sudden and apparently incidental communication of some new fact, of\
some circumstance of great importance in the case, of which he had no\
previous idea and could not have foreseen. We had such a fact in\
readiness\'97that was Grigory\'92s evidence about the open door through which\
the prisoner had run out. He had completely forgotten about that door and\
had not even suspected that Grigory could have seen it.\
\
\'93The effect of it was amazing. He leapt up and shouted to us, \'91Then\
Smerdyakov murdered him, it was Smerdyakov!\'92 and so betrayed the basis of\
the defense he was keeping back, and betrayed it in its most improbable\
shape, for Smerdyakov could only have committed the murder after he had\
knocked Grigory down and run away. When we told him that Grigory saw the\
door was open before he fell down, and had heard Smerdyakov behind the\
screen as he came out of his bedroom\'97Karamazov was positively crushed. My\
esteemed and witty colleague, Nikolay Parfenovitch, told me afterwards\
that he was almost moved to tears at the sight of him. And to improve\
matters, the prisoner hastened to tell us about the much\uc0\u8208 talked\u8208 of little\
bag\'97so be it, you shall hear this romance!\
\
\'93Gentlemen of the jury, I have told you already why I consider this\
romance not only an absurdity, but the most improbable invention that\
could have been brought forward in the circumstances. If one tried for a\
bet to invent the most unlikely story, one could hardly find anything more\
incredible. The worst of such stories is that the triumphant romancers can\
always be put to confusion and crushed by the very details in which real\
life is so rich and which these unhappy and involuntary story\uc0\u8208 tellers\
neglect as insignificant trifles. Oh, they have no thought to spare for\
such details, their minds are concentrated on their grand invention as a\
whole, and fancy any one daring to pull them up for a trifle! But that\'92s\
how they are caught. The prisoner was asked the question, \'91Where did you\
get the stuff for your little bag and who made it for you?\'92 \'91I made it\
myself.\'92 \'91And where did you get the linen?\'92 The prisoner was positively\
offended, he thought it almost insulting to ask him such a trivial\
question, and would you believe it, his resentment was genuine! But they\
are all like that. \'91I tore it off my shirt.\'92 \'91Then we shall find that\
shirt among your linen to\uc0\u8208 morrow, with a piece torn off.\'92 And only fancy,\
gentlemen of the jury, if we really had found that torn shirt (and how\
could we have failed to find it in his chest of drawers or trunk?) that\
would have been a fact, a material fact in support of his statement! But\
he was incapable of that reflection. \'91I don\'92t remember, it may not have\
been off my shirt, I sewed it up in one of my landlady\'92s caps.\'92 \'91What sort\
of a cap?\'92 \'91It was an old cotton rag of hers lying about.\'92 \'91And do you\
remember that clearly?\'92 \'91No, I don\'92t.\'92 And he was angry, very angry, and\
yet imagine not remembering it! At the most terrible moments of man\'92s\
life, for instance when he is being led to execution, he remembers just\
such trifles. He will forget anything but some green roof that has flashed\
past him on the road, or a jackdaw on a cross\'97that he will remember. He\
concealed the making of that little bag from his household, he must have\
remembered his humiliating fear that some one might come in and find him\
needle in hand, how at the slightest sound he slipped behind the screen\
(there is a screen in his lodgings).\
\
\'93But, gentlemen of the jury, why do I tell you all this, all these\
details, trifles?\'94 cried Ippolit Kirillovitch suddenly. \'93Just because the\
prisoner still persists in these absurdities to this moment. He has not\
explained anything since that fatal night two months ago, he has not added\
one actual illuminating fact to his former fantastic statements; all those\
are trivialities. \'91You must believe it on my honor.\'92 Oh, we are glad to\
believe it, we are eager to believe it, even if only on his word of honor!\
Are we jackals thirsting for human blood? Show us a single fact in the\
prisoner\'92s favor and we shall rejoice; but let it be a substantial, real\
fact, and not a conclusion drawn from the prisoner\'92s expression by his own\
brother, or that when he beat himself on the breast he must have meant to\
point to the little bag, in the darkness, too. We shall rejoice at the new\
fact, we shall be the first to repudiate our charge, we shall hasten to\
repudiate it. But now justice cries out and we persist, we cannot\
repudiate anything.\'94\
\
Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to his final peroration. He looked as though\
he was in a fever, he spoke of the blood that cried for vengeance, the\
blood of the father murdered by his son, with the base motive of robbery!\
He pointed to the tragic and glaring consistency of the facts.\
\
\'93And whatever you may hear from the talented and celebrated counsel for\
the defense,\'94 Ippolit Kirillovitch could not resist adding, \'93whatever\
eloquent and touching appeals may be made to your sensibilities, remember\
that at this moment you are in a temple of justice. Remember that you are\
the champions of our justice, the champions of our holy Russia, of her\
principles, her family, everything that she holds sacred! Yes, you\
represent Russia here at this moment, and your verdict will be heard not\
in this hall only but will re\'ebcho throughout the whole of Russia, and all\
Russia will hear you, as her champions and her judges, and she will be\
encouraged or disheartened by your verdict. Do not disappoint Russia and\
her expectations. Our fatal troika dashes on in her headlong flight\
perhaps to destruction and in all Russia for long past men have stretched\
out imploring hands and called a halt to its furious reckless course. And\
if other nations stand aside from that troika that may be, not from\
respect, as the poet would fain believe, but simply from horror. From\
horror, perhaps from disgust. And well it is that they stand aside, but\
maybe they will cease one day to do so and will form a firm wall\
confronting the hurrying apparition and will check the frenzied rush of\
our lawlessness, for the sake of their own safety, enlightenment and\
civilization. Already we have heard voices of alarm from Europe, they\
already begin to sound. Do not tempt them! Do not heap up their growing\
hatred by a sentence justifying the murder of a father by his son!\'94\
\
Though Ippolit Kirillovitch was genuinely moved, he wound up his speech\
with this rhetorical appeal\'97and the effect produced by him was\
extraordinary. When he had finished his speech, he went out hurriedly and,\
as I have mentioned before, almost fainted in the adjoining room. There\
was no applause in the court, but serious persons were pleased. The ladies\
were not so well satisfied, though even they were pleased with his\
eloquence, especially as they had no apprehensions as to the upshot of the\
trial and had full trust in Fetyukovitch. \'93He will speak at last and of\
course carry all before him.\'94\
\
Every one looked at Mitya; he sat silent through the whole of the\
prosecutor\'92s speech, clenching his teeth, with his hands clasped, and his\
head bowed. Only from time to time he raised his head and listened,\
especially when Grushenka was spoken of. When the prosecutor mentioned\
Rakitin\'92s opinion of her, a smile of contempt and anger passed over his\
face and he murmured rather audibly, \'93The Bernards!\'94 When Ippolit\
Kirillovitch described how he had questioned and tortured him at Mokroe,\
Mitya raised his head and listened with intense curiosity. At one point he\
seemed about to jump up and cry out, but controlled himself and only\
shrugged his shoulders disdainfully. People talked afterwards of the end\
of the speech, of the prosecutor\'92s feat in examining the prisoner at\
Mokroe, and jeered at Ippolit Kirillovitch. \'93The man could not resist\
boasting of his cleverness,\'94 they said.\
\
The court was adjourned, but only for a short interval, a quarter of an\
hour or twenty minutes at most. There was a hum of conversation and\
exclamations in the audience. I remember some of them.\
\
\'93A weighty speech,\'94 a gentleman in one group observed gravely.\
\
\'93He brought in too much psychology,\'94 said another voice.\
\
\'93But it was all true, the absolute truth!\'94\
\
\'93Yes, he is first rate at it.\'94\
\
\'93He summed it all up.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, he summed us up, too,\'94 chimed in another voice. \'93Do you remember, at\
the beginning of his speech, making out we were all like Fyodor\
Pavlovitch?\'94\
\
\'93And at the end, too. But that was all rot.\'94\
\
\'93And obscure too.\'94\
\
\'93He was a little too much carried away.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s unjust, it\'92s unjust.\'94\
\
\'93No, it was smartly done, anyway. He\'92s had long to wait, but he\'92s had his\
say, ha ha!\'94\
\
\'93What will the counsel for the defense say?\'94\
\
In another group I heard:\
\
\'93He had no business to make a thrust at the Petersburg man like that;\
\'91appealing to your sensibilities\'92\'97do you remember?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, that was awkward of him.\'94\
\
\'93He was in too great a hurry.\'94\
\
\'93He is a nervous man.\'94\
\
\'93We laugh, but what must the prisoner be feeling?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, what must it be for Mitya?\'94\
\
In a third group:\
\
\'93What lady is that, the fat one, with the lorgnette, sitting at the end?\'94\
\
\'93She is a general\'92s wife, divorced, I know her.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s why she has the lorgnette.\'94\
\
\'93She is not good for much.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no, she is a piquante little woman.\'94\
\
\'93Two places beyond her there is a little fair woman, she is prettier.\'94\
\
\'93They caught him smartly at Mokroe, didn\'92t they, eh?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, it was smart enough. We\'92ve heard it before, how often he has told the\
story at people\'92s houses!\'94\
\
\'93And he couldn\'92t resist doing it now. That\'92s vanity.\'94\
\
\'93He is a man with a grievance, he he!\'94\
\
\'93Yes, and quick to take offense. And there was too much rhetoric, such\
long sentences.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, he tries to alarm us, he kept trying to alarm us. Do you remember\
about the troika? Something about \'91They have Hamlets, but we have, so far,\
only Karamazovs!\'92 That was cleverly said!\'94\
\
\'93That was to propitiate the liberals. He is afraid of them.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, and he is afraid of the lawyer, too.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, what will Fetyukovitch say?\'94\
\
\'93Whatever he says, he won\'92t get round our peasants.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t you think so?\'94\
\
A fourth group:\
\
\'93What he said about the troika was good, that piece about the other\
nations.\'94\
\
\'93And that was true what he said about other nations not standing it.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean?\'94\
\
\'93Why, in the English Parliament a Member got up last week and speaking\
about the Nihilists asked the Ministry whether it was not high time to\
intervene, to educate this barbarous people. Ippolit was thinking of him,\
I know he was. He was talking about that last week.\'94\
\
\'93Not an easy job.\'94\
\
\'93Not an easy job? Why not?\'94\
\
\'93Why, we\'92d shut up Kronstadt and not let them have any corn. Where would\
they get it?\'94\
\
\'93In America. They get it from America now.\'94\
\
\'93Nonsense!\'94\
\
But the bell rang, all rushed to their places. Fetyukovitch mounted the\
tribune.\
\
\
\
Chapter X. The Speech For The Defense. An Argument That Cuts Both Ways\
\
\
All was hushed as the first words of the famous orator rang out. The eyes\
of the audience were fastened upon him. He began very simply and directly,\
with an air of conviction, but not the slightest trace of conceit. He made\
no attempt at eloquence, at pathos, or emotional phrases. He was like a\
man speaking in a circle of intimate and sympathetic friends. His voice\
was a fine one, sonorous and sympathetic, and there was something genuine\
and simple in the very sound of it. But every one realized at once that\
the speaker might suddenly rise to genuine pathos and \'93pierce the heart\
with untold power.\'94 His language was perhaps more irregular than Ippolit\
Kirillovitch\'92s, but he spoke without long phrases, and indeed, with more\
precision. One thing did not please the ladies: he kept bending forward,\
especially at the beginning of his speech, not exactly bowing, but as\
though he were about to dart at his listeners, bending his long spine in\
half, as though there were a spring in the middle that enabled him to bend\
almost at right angles.\
\
At the beginning of his speech he spoke rather disconnectedly, without\
system, one may say, dealing with facts separately, though, at the end,\
these facts formed a whole. His speech might be divided into two parts,\
the first consisting of criticism in refutation of the charge, sometimes\
malicious and sarcastic. But in the second half he suddenly changed his\
tone, and even his manner, and at once rose to pathos. The audience seemed\
on the look\uc0\u8208 out for it, and quivered with enthusiasm.\
\
He went straight to the point, and began by saying that although he\
practiced in Petersburg, he had more than once visited provincial towns to\
defend prisoners, of whose innocence he had a conviction or at least a\
preconceived idea. \'93That is what has happened to me in the present case,\'94\
he explained. \'93From the very first accounts in the newspapers I was struck\
by something which strongly prepossessed me in the prisoner\'92s favor. What\
interested me most was a fact which often occurs in legal practice, but\
rarely, I think, in such an extreme and peculiar form as in the present\
case. I ought to formulate that peculiarity only at the end of my speech,\
but I will do so at the very beginning, for it is my weakness to go to\
work directly, not keeping my effects in reserve and economizing my\
material. That may be imprudent on my part, but at least it\'92s sincere.\
What I have in my mind is this: there is an overwhelming chain of evidence\
against the prisoner, and at the same time not one fact that will stand\
criticism, if it is examined separately. As I followed the case more\
closely in the papers my idea was more and more confirmed, and I suddenly\
received from the prisoner\'92s relatives a request to undertake his defense.\
I at once hurried here, and here I became completely convinced. It was to\
break down this terrible chain of facts, and to show that each piece of\
evidence taken separately was unproved and fantastic, that I undertook the\
case.\'94\
\
So Fetyukovitch began.\
\
\'93Gentlemen of the jury,\'94 he suddenly protested, \'93I am new to this\
district. I have no preconceived ideas. The prisoner, a man of turbulent\
and unbridled temper, has not insulted me. But he has insulted perhaps\
hundreds of persons in this town, and so prejudiced many people against\
him beforehand. Of course I recognize that the moral sentiment of local\
society is justly excited against him. The prisoner is of turbulent and\
violent temper. Yet he was received in society here; he was even welcome\
in the family of my talented friend, the prosecutor.\'94\
\
(N.B. At these words there were two or three laughs in the audience,\
quickly suppressed, but noticed by all. All of us knew that the prosecutor\
received Mitya against his will, solely because he had somehow interested\
his wife\'97a lady of the highest virtue and moral worth, but fanciful,\
capricious, and fond of opposing her husband, especially in trifles.\
Mitya\'92s visits, however, had not been frequent.)\
\
\'93Nevertheless I venture to suggest,\'94 Fetyukovitch continued, \'93that in\
spite of his independent mind and just character, my opponent may have\
formed a mistaken prejudice against my unfortunate client. Oh, that is so\
natural; the unfortunate man has only too well deserved such prejudice.\
Outraged morality, and still more outraged taste, is often relentless. We\
have, in the talented prosecutor\'92s speech, heard a stern analysis of the\
prisoner\'92s character and conduct, and his severe critical attitude to the\
case was evident. And, what\'92s more, he went into psychological subtleties\
into which he could not have entered, if he had the least conscious and\
malicious prejudice against the prisoner. But there are things which are\
even worse, even more fatal in such cases, than the most malicious and\
consciously unfair attitude. It is worse if we are carried away by the\
artistic instinct, by the desire to create, so to speak, a romance,\
especially if God has endowed us with psychological insight. Before I\
started on my way here, I was warned in Petersburg, and was myself aware,\
that I should find here a talented opponent whose psychological insight\
and subtlety had gained him peculiar renown in legal circles of recent\
years. But profound as psychology is, it\'92s a knife that cuts both ways.\'94\
(Laughter among the public.) \'93You will, of course, forgive me my\
comparison; I can\'92t boast of eloquence. But I will take as an example any\
point in the prosecutor\'92s speech.\
\
\'93The prisoner, running away in the garden in the dark, climbed over the\
fence, was seized by the servant, and knocked him down with a brass\
pestle. Then he jumped back into the garden and spent five minutes over\
the man, trying to discover whether he had killed him or not. And the\
prosecutor refuses to believe the prisoner\'92s statement that he ran to old\
Grigory out of pity. \'91No,\'92 he says, \'91such sensibility is impossible at\
such a moment, that\'92s unnatural; he ran to find out whether the only\
witness of his crime was dead or alive, and so showed that he had\
committed the murder, since he would not have run back for any other\
reason.\'92\
\
\'93Here you have psychology; but let us take the same method and apply it to\
the case the other way round, and our result will be no less probable. The\
murderer, we are told, leapt down to find out, as a precaution, whether\
the witness was alive or not, yet he had left in his murdered father\'92s\
study, as the prosecutor himself argues, an amazing piece of evidence in\
the shape of a torn envelope, with an inscription that there had been\
three thousand roubles in it. \'91If he had carried that envelope away with\
him, no one in the world would have known of that envelope and of the\
notes in it, and that the money had been stolen by the prisoner.\'92 Those\
are the prosecutor\'92s own words. So on one side you see a complete absence\
of precaution, a man who has lost his head and run away in a fright,\
leaving that clew on the floor, and two minutes later, when he has killed\
another man, we are entitled to assume the most heartless and calculating\
foresight in him. But even admitting this was so, it is psychological\
subtlety, I suppose, that discerns that under certain circumstances I\
become as bloodthirsty and keen\uc0\u8208 sighted as a Caucasian eagle, while at the\
next I am as timid and blind as a mole. But if I am so bloodthirsty and\
cruelly calculating that when I kill a man I only run back to find out\
whether he is alive to witness against me, why should I spend five minutes\
looking after my victim at the risk of encountering other witnesses? Why\
soak my handkerchief, wiping the blood off his head so that it may be\
evidence against me later? If he were so cold\uc0\u8208 hearted and calculating, why\
not hit the servant on the head again and again with the same pestle so as\
to kill him outright and relieve himself of all anxiety about the witness?\
\
\'93Again, though he ran to see whether the witness was alive, he left\
another witness on the path, that brass pestle which he had taken from the\
two women, and which they could always recognize afterwards as theirs, and\
prove that he had taken it from them. And it is not as though he had\
forgotten it on the path, dropped it through carelessness or haste, no, he\
had flung away his weapon, for it was found fifteen paces from where\
Grigory lay. Why did he do so? Just because he was grieved at having\
killed a man, an old servant; and he flung away the pestle with a curse,\
as a murderous weapon. That\'92s how it must have been, what other reason\
could he have had for throwing it so far? And if he was capable of feeling\
grief and pity at having killed a man, it shows that he was innocent of\
his father\'92s murder. Had he murdered him, he would never have run to\
another victim out of pity; then he would have felt differently; his\
thoughts would have been centered on self\uc0\u8208 preservation. He would have had\
none to spare for pity, that is beyond doubt. On the contrary, he would\
have broken his skull instead of spending five minutes looking after him.\
There was room for pity and good\uc0\u8208 feeling just because his conscience had\
been clear till then. Here we have a different psychology. I have\
purposely resorted to this method, gentlemen of the jury, to show that you\
can prove anything by it. It all depends on who makes use of it.\
Psychology lures even most serious people into romancing, and quite\
unconsciously. I am speaking of the abuse of psychology, gentlemen.\'94\
\
Sounds of approval and laughter, at the expense of the prosecutor, were\
again audible in the court. I will not repeat the speech in detail; I will\
only quote some passages from it, some leading points.\
\
\
\
Chapter XI. There Was No Money. There Was No Robbery\
\
\
There was one point that struck every one in Fetyukovitch\'92s speech. He\
flatly denied the existence of the fatal three thousand roubles, and\
consequently, the possibility of their having been stolen.\
\
\'93Gentlemen of the jury,\'94 he began. \'93Every new and unprejudiced observer\
must be struck by a characteristic peculiarity in the present case,\
namely, the charge of robbery, and the complete impossibility of proving\
that there was anything to be stolen. We are told that money was\
stolen\'97three thousand roubles\'97but whether those roubles ever existed,\
nobody knows. Consider, how have we heard of that sum, and who has seen\
the notes? The only person who saw them, and stated that they had been put\
in the envelope, was the servant, Smerdyakov. He had spoken of it to the\
prisoner and his brother, Ivan Fyodorovitch, before the catastrophe.\
Madame Svyetlov, too, had been told of it. But not one of these three\
persons had actually seen the notes, no one but Smerdyakov had seen them.\
\
\'93Here the question arises, if it\'92s true that they did exist, and that\
Smerdyakov had seen them, when did he see them for the last time? What if\
his master had taken the notes from under his bed and put them back in his\
cash\uc0\u8208 box without telling him? Note, that according to Smerdyakov\'92s story\
the notes were kept under the mattress; the prisoner must have pulled them\
out, and yet the bed was absolutely unrumpled; that is carefully recorded\
in the protocol. How could the prisoner have found the notes without\
disturbing the bed? How could he have helped soiling with his blood\uc0\u8208 \
stained hands the fine and spotless linen with which the bed had been\
purposely made?\
\
\'93But I shall be asked: What about the envelope on the floor? Yes, it\'92s\
worth saying a word or two about that envelope. I was somewhat surprised\
just now to hear the highly talented prosecutor declare of himself\'97of\
himself, observe\'97that but for that envelope, but for its being left on the\
floor, no one in the world would have known of the existence of that\
envelope and the notes in it, and therefore of the prisoner\'92s having\
stolen it. And so that torn scrap of paper is, by the prosecutor\'92s own\
admission, the sole proof on which the charge of robbery rests, \'91otherwise\
no one would have known of the robbery, nor perhaps even of the money.\'92\
But is the mere fact that that scrap of paper was lying on the floor a\
proof that there was money in it, and that that money had been stolen?\
Yet, it will be objected, Smerdyakov had seen the money in the envelope.\
But when, when had he seen it for the last time, I ask you that? I talked\
to Smerdyakov, and he told me that he had seen the notes two days before\
the catastrophe. Then why not imagine that old Fyodor Pavlovitch, locked\
up alone in impatient and hysterical expectation of the object of his\
adoration, may have whiled away the time by breaking open the envelope and\
taking out the notes. \'91What\'92s the use of the envelope?\'92 he may have asked\
himself. \'91She won\'92t believe the notes are there, but when I show her the\
thirty rainbow\uc0\u8208 colored notes in one roll, it will make more impression,\
you may be sure, it will make her mouth water.\'92 And so he tears open the\
envelope, takes out the money, and flings the envelope on the floor,\
conscious of being the owner and untroubled by any fears of leaving\
evidence.\
\
\'93Listen, gentlemen, could anything be more likely than this theory and\
such an action? Why is it out of the question? But if anything of the sort\
could have taken place, the charge of robbery falls to the ground; if\
there was no money, there was no theft of it. If the envelope on the floor\
may be taken as evidence that there had been money in it, why may I not\
maintain the opposite, that the envelope was on the floor because the\
money had been taken from it by its owner?\
\
\'93But I shall be asked what became of the money if Fyodor Pavlovitch took\
it out of the envelope since it was not found when the police searched the\
house? In the first place, part of the money was found in the cash\uc0\u8208 box,\
and secondly, he might have taken it out that morning or the evening\
before to make some other use of it, to give or send it away; he may have\
changed his idea, his plan of action completely, without thinking it\
necessary to announce the fact to Smerdyakov beforehand. And if there is\
the barest possibility of such an explanation, how can the prisoner be so\
positively accused of having committed murder for the sake of robbery, and\
of having actually carried out that robbery? This is encroaching on the\
domain of romance. If it is maintained that something has been stolen, the\
thing must be produced, or at least its existence must be proved beyond\
doubt. Yet no one had ever seen these notes.\
\
\'93Not long ago in Petersburg a young man of eighteen, hardly more than a\
boy, who carried on a small business as a costermonger, went in broad\
daylight into a moneychanger\'92s shop with an ax, and with extraordinary,\
typical audacity killed the master of the shop and carried off fifteen\
hundred roubles. Five hours later he was arrested, and, except fifteen\
roubles he had already managed to spend, the whole sum was found on him.\
Moreover, the shopman, on his return to the shop after the murder,\
informed the police not only of the exact sum stolen, but even of the\
notes and gold coins of which that sum was made up, and those very notes\
and coins were found on the criminal. This was followed by a full and\
genuine confession on the part of the murderer. That\'92s what I call\
evidence, gentlemen of the jury! In that case I know, I see, I touch the\
money, and cannot deny its existence. Is it the same in the present case?\
And yet it is a question of life and death.\
\
\'93Yes, I shall be told, but he was carousing that night, squandering money;\
he was shown to have had fifteen hundred roubles\'97where did he get the\
money? But the very fact that only fifteen hundred could be found, and the\
other half of the sum could nowhere be discovered, shows that that money\
was not the same, and had never been in any envelope. By strict\
calculation of time it was proved at the preliminary inquiry that the\
prisoner ran straight from those women servants to Perhotin\'92s without\
going home, and that he had been nowhere. So he had been all the time in\
company and therefore could not have divided the three thousand in half\
and hidden half in the town. It\'92s just this consideration that has led the\
prosecutor to assume that the money is hidden in some crevice at Mokroe.\
Why not in the dungeons of the castle of Udolpho, gentlemen? Isn\'92t this\
supposition really too fantastic and too romantic? And observe, if that\
supposition breaks down, the whole charge of robbery is scattered to the\
winds, for in that case what could have become of the other fifteen\
hundred roubles? By what miracle could they have disappeared, since it\'92s\
proved the prisoner went nowhere else? And we are ready to ruin a man\'92s\
life with such tales!\
\
\'93I shall be told that he could not explain where he got the fifteen\
hundred that he had, and every one knew that he was without money before\
that night. Who knew it, pray? The prisoner has made a clear and\
unflinching statement of the source of that money, and if you will have it\
so, gentlemen of the jury, nothing can be more probable than that\
statement, and more consistent with the temper and spirit of the prisoner.\
The prosecutor is charmed with his own romance. A man of weak will, who\
had brought himself to take the three thousand so insultingly offered by\
his betrothed, could not, we are told, have set aside half and sewn it up,\
but would, even if he had done so, have unpicked it every two days and\
taken out a hundred, and so would have spent it all in a month. All this,\
you will remember, was put forward in a tone that brooked no\
contradiction. But what if the thing happened quite differently? What if\
you\'92ve been weaving a romance, and about quite a different kind of man?\
That\'92s just it, you have invented quite a different man!\
\
\'93I shall be told, perhaps, there are witnesses that he spent on one day\
all that three thousand given him by his betrothed a month before the\
catastrophe, so he could not have divided the sum in half. But who are\
these witnesses? The value of their evidence has been shown in court\
already. Besides, in another man\'92s hand a crust always seems larger, and\
no one of these witnesses counted that money; they all judged simply at\
sight. And the witness Maximov has testified that the prisoner had twenty\
thousand in his hand. You see, gentlemen of the jury, psychology is a two\uc0\u8208 \
edged weapon. Let me turn the other edge now and see what comes of it.\
\
\'93A month before the catastrophe the prisoner was entrusted by Katerina\
Ivanovna with three thousand roubles to send off by post. But the question\
is: is it true that they were entrusted to him in such an insulting and\
degrading way as was proclaimed just now? The first statement made by the\
young lady on the subject was different, perfectly different. In the\
second statement we heard only cries of resentment and revenge, cries of\
long\uc0\u8208 concealed hatred. And the very fact that the witness gave her first\
evidence incorrectly, gives us a right to conclude that her second piece\
of evidence may have been incorrect also. The prosecutor will not, dare\
not (his own words) touch on that story. So be it. I will not touch on it\
either, but will only venture to observe that if a lofty and high\uc0\u8208 \
principled person, such as that highly respected young lady unquestionably\
is, if such a person, I say, allows herself suddenly in court to\
contradict her first statement, with the obvious motive of ruining the\
prisoner, it is clear that this evidence has been given not impartially,\
not coolly. Have not we the right to assume that a revengeful woman might\
have exaggerated much? Yes, she may well have exaggerated, in particular,\
the insult and humiliation of her offering him the money. No, it was\
offered in such a way that it was possible to take it, especially for a\
man so easy\uc0\u8208 going as the prisoner, above all, as he expected to receive\
shortly from his father the three thousand roubles that he reckoned was\
owing to him. It was unreflecting of him, but it was just his\
irresponsible want of reflection that made him so confident that his\
father would give him the money, that he would get it, and so could always\
dispatch the money entrusted to him and repay the debt.\
\
\'93But the prosecutor refuses to allow that he could the same day have set\
aside half the money and sewn it up in a little bag. That\'92s not his\
character, he tells us, he couldn\'92t have had such feelings. But yet he\
talked himself of the broad Karamazov nature; he cried out about the two\
extremes which a Karamazov can contemplate at once. Karamazov is just such\
a two\uc0\u8208 sided nature, fluctuating between two extremes, that even when moved\
by the most violent craving for riotous gayety, he can pull himself up, if\
something strikes him on the other side. And on the other side is\
love\'97that new love which had flamed up in his heart, and for that love he\
needed money; oh, far more than for carousing with his mistress. If she\
were to say to him, \'91I am yours, I won\'92t have Fyodor Pavlovitch,\'92 then he\
must have money to take her away. That was more important than carousing.\
Could a Karamazov fail to understand it? That anxiety was just what he was\
suffering from\'97what is there improbable in his laying aside that money and\
concealing it in case of emergency?\
\
\'93But time passed, and Fyodor Pavlovitch did not give the prisoner the\
expected three thousand; on the contrary, the latter heard that he meant\
to use this sum to seduce the woman he, the prisoner, loved. \'91If Fyodor\
Pavlovitch doesn\'92t give the money,\'92 he thought, \'91I shall be put in the\
position of a thief before Katerina Ivanovna.\'92 And then the idea presented\
itself to him that he would go to Katerina Ivanovna, lay before her the\
fifteen hundred roubles he still carried round his neck, and say, \'91I am a\
scoundrel, but not a thief.\'92 So here we have already a twofold reason why\
he should guard that sum of money as the apple of his eye, why he\
shouldn\'92t unpick the little bag, and spend it a hundred at a time. Why\
should you deny the prisoner a sense of honor? Yes, he has a sense of\
honor, granted that it\'92s misplaced, granted it\'92s often mistaken, yet it\
exists and amounts to a passion, and he has proved that.\
\
\'93But now the affair becomes even more complex; his jealous torments reach\
a climax, and those same two questions torture his fevered brain more and\
more: \'91If I repay Katerina Ivanovna, where can I find the means to go off\
with Grushenka?\'92 If he behaved wildly, drank, and made disturbances in the\
taverns in the course of that month, it was perhaps because he was\
wretched and strained beyond his powers of endurance. These two questions\
became so acute that they drove him at last to despair. He sent his\
younger brother to beg for the last time for the three thousand roubles,\
but without waiting for a reply, burst in himself and ended by beating the\
old man in the presence of witnesses. After that he had no prospect of\
getting it from any one; his father would not give it him after that\
beating.\
\
\'93The same evening he struck himself on the breast, just on the upper part\
of the breast where the little bag was, and swore to his brother that he\
had the means of not being a scoundrel, but that still he would remain a\
scoundrel, for he foresaw that he would not use that means, that he\
wouldn\'92t have the character, that he wouldn\'92t have the will\uc0\u8208 power to do\
it. Why, why does the prosecutor refuse to believe the evidence of Alexey\
Karamazov, given so genuinely and sincerely, so spontaneously and\
convincingly? And why, on the contrary, does he force me to believe in\
money hidden in a crevice, in the dungeons of the castle of Udolpho?\
\
\'93The same evening, after his talk with his brother, the prisoner wrote\
that fatal letter, and that letter is the chief, the most stupendous proof\
of the prisoner having committed robbery! \'91I shall beg from every one, and\
if I don\'92t get it I shall murder my father and shall take the envelope\
with the pink ribbon on it from under his mattress as soon as Ivan has\
gone.\'92 A full program of the murder, we are told, so it must have been he.\
\'91It has all been done as he wrote,\'92 cries the prosecutor.\
\
\'93But in the first place, it\'92s the letter of a drunken man and written in\
great irritation; secondly, he writes of the envelope from what he has\
heard from Smerdyakov again, for he has not seen the envelope himself; and\
thirdly, he wrote it indeed, but how can you prove that he did it? Did the\
prisoner take the envelope from under the pillow, did he find the money,\
did that money exist indeed? And was it to get money that the prisoner ran\
off, if you remember? He ran off post\uc0\u8208 haste not to steal, but to find out\
where she was, the woman who had crushed him. He was not running to carry\
out a program, to carry out what he had written, that is, not for an act\
of premeditated robbery, but he ran suddenly, spontaneously, in a jealous\
fury. Yes! I shall be told, but when he got there and murdered him he\
seized the money, too. But did he murder him after all? The charge of\
robbery I repudiate with indignation. A man cannot be accused of robbery,\
if it\'92s impossible to state accurately what he has stolen; that\'92s an\
axiom. But did he murder him without robbery, did he murder him at all? Is\
that proved? Isn\'92t that, too, a romance?\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter XII. And There Was No Murder Either\
\
\
\'93Allow me, gentlemen of the jury, to remind you that a man\'92s life is at\
stake and that you must be careful. We have heard the prosecutor himself\
admit that until to\uc0\u8208 day he hesitated to accuse the prisoner of a full and\
conscious premeditation of the crime; he hesitated till he saw that fatal\
drunken letter which was produced in court to\uc0\u8208 day. \'91All was done as\
written.\'92 But, I repeat again, he was running to her, to seek her, solely\
to find out where she was. That\'92s a fact that can\'92t be disputed. Had she\
been at home, he would not have run away, but would have remained at her\
side, and so would not have done what he promised in the letter. He ran\
unexpectedly and accidentally, and by that time very likely he did not\
even remember his drunken letter. \'91He snatched up the pestle,\'92 they say,\
and you will remember how a whole edifice of psychology was built on that\
pestle\'97why he was bound to look at that pestle as a weapon, to snatch it\
up, and so on, and so on. A very commonplace idea occurs to me at this\
point: What if that pestle had not been in sight, had not been lying on\
the shelf from which it was snatched by the prisoner, but had been put\
away in a cupboard? It would not have caught the prisoner\'92s eye, and he\
would have run away without a weapon, with empty hands, and then he would\
certainly not have killed any one. How then can I look upon the pestle as\
a proof of premeditation?\
\
\'93Yes, but he talked in the taverns of murdering his father, and two days\
before, on the evening when he wrote his drunken letter, he was quiet and\
only quarreled with a shopman in the tavern, because a Karamazov could not\
help quarreling, forsooth! But my answer to that is, that, if he was\
planning such a murder in accordance with his letter, he certainly would\
not have quarreled even with a shopman, and probably would not have gone\
into the tavern at all, because a person plotting such a crime seeks quiet\
and retirement, seeks to efface himself, to avoid being seen and heard,\
and that not from calculation, but from instinct. Gentlemen of the jury,\
the psychological method is a two\uc0\u8208 edged weapon, and we, too, can use it.\
As for all this shouting in taverns throughout the month, don\'92t we often\
hear children, or drunkards coming out of taverns shout, \'91I\'92ll kill you\'92?\
but they don\'92t murder any one. And that fatal letter\'97isn\'92t that simply\
drunken irritability, too? Isn\'92t that simply the shout of the brawler\
outside the tavern, \'91I\'92ll kill you! I\'92ll kill the lot of you!\'92 Why not,\
why could it not be that? What reason have we to call that letter \'91fatal\'92\
rather than absurd? Because his father has been found murdered, because a\
witness saw the prisoner running out of the garden with a weapon in his\
hand, and was knocked down by him: therefore, we are told, everything was\
done as he had planned in writing, and the letter was not \'91absurd,\'92 but\
\'91fatal.\'92\
\
\'93Now, thank God! we\'92ve come to the real point: \'91since he was in the\
garden, he must have murdered him.\'92 In those few words: \'91since he _was_,\
then he _must_\'92 lies the whole case for the prosecution. He was there, so\
he must have. And what if there is no _must_ about it, even if he was\
there? Oh, I admit that the chain of evidence\'97the coincidences\'97are really\
suggestive. But examine all these facts separately, regardless of their\
connection. Why, for instance, does the prosecution refuse to admit the\
truth of the prisoner\'92s statement that he ran away from his father\'92s\
window? Remember the sarcasms in which the prosecutor indulged at the\
expense of the respectful and \'91pious\'92 sentiments which suddenly came over\
the murderer. But what if there were something of the sort, a feeling of\
religious awe, if not of filial respect? \'91My mother must have been praying\
for me at that moment,\'92 were the prisoner\'92s words at the preliminary\
inquiry, and so he ran away as soon as he convinced himself that Madame\
Svyetlov was not in his father\'92s house. \'91But he could not convince himself\
by looking through the window,\'92 the prosecutor objects. But why couldn\'92t\
he? Why? The window opened at the signals given by the prisoner. Some word\
might have been uttered by Fyodor Pavlovitch, some exclamation which\
showed the prisoner that she was not there. Why should we assume\
everything as we imagine it, as we make up our minds to imagine it? A\
thousand things may happen in reality which elude the subtlest\
imagination.\
\
\'93 \'91Yes, but Grigory saw the door open and so the prisoner certainly was in\
the house, therefore he killed him.\'92 Now about that door, gentlemen of the\
jury.... Observe that we have only the statement of one witness as to that\
door, and he was at the time in such a condition, that\'97 But supposing the\
door was open; supposing the prisoner has lied in denying it, from an\
instinct of self\uc0\u8208 defense, natural in his position; supposing he did go\
into the house\'97well, what then? How does it follow that because he was\
there he committed the murder? He might have dashed in, run through the\
rooms; might have pushed his father away; might have struck him; but as\
soon as he had made sure Madame Svyetlov was not there, he may have run\
away rejoicing that she was not there and that he had not killed his\
father. And it was perhaps just because he had escaped from the temptation\
to kill his father, because he had a clear conscience and was rejoicing at\
not having killed him, that he was capable of a pure feeling, the feeling\
of pity and compassion, and leapt off the fence a minute later to the\
assistance of Grigory after he had, in his excitement, knocked him down.\
\
\'93With terrible eloquence the prosecutor has described to us the dreadful\
state of the prisoner\'92s mind at Mokroe when love again lay before him\
calling him to new life, while love was impossible for him because he had\
his father\'92s bloodstained corpse behind him and beyond that\
corpse\'97retribution. And yet the prosecutor allowed him love, which he\
explained, according to his method, talking about his drunken condition,\
about a criminal being taken to execution, about it being still far off,\
and so on and so on. But again I ask, Mr. Prosecutor, have you not\
invented a new personality? Is the prisoner so coarse and heartless as to\
be able to think at that moment of love and of dodges to escape\
punishment, if his hands were really stained with his father\'92s blood? No,\
no, no! As soon as it was made plain to him that she loved him and called\
him to her side, promising him new happiness, oh! then, I protest he must\
have felt the impulse to suicide doubled, trebled, and must have killed\
himself, if he had his father\'92s murder on his conscience. Oh, no! he would\
not have forgotten where his pistols lay! I know the prisoner: the savage,\
stony heartlessness ascribed to him by the prosecutor is inconsistent with\
his character. He would have killed himself, that\'92s certain. He did not\
kill himself just because \'91his mother\'92s prayers had saved him,\'92 and he was\
innocent of his father\'92s blood. He was troubled, he was grieving that\
night at Mokroe only about old Grigory and praying to God that the old man\
would recover, that his blow had not been fatal, and that he would not\
have to suffer for it. Why not accept such an interpretation of the facts?\
What trustworthy proof have we that the prisoner is lying?\
\
\'93But we shall be told at once again, \'91There is his father\'92s corpse! If he\
ran away without murdering him, who did murder him?\'92 Here, I repeat, you\
have the whole logic of the prosecution. Who murdered him, if not he?\
There\'92s no one to put in his place.\
\
\'93Gentlemen of the jury, is that really so? Is it positively, actually true\
that there is no one else at all? We\'92ve heard the prosecutor count on his\
fingers all the persons who were in that house that night. They were five\
in number; three of them, I agree, could not have been responsible\'97the\
murdered man himself, old Grigory, and his wife. There are left then the\
prisoner and Smerdyakov, and the prosecutor dramatically exclaims that the\
prisoner pointed to Smerdyakov because he had no one else to fix on, that\
had there been a sixth person, even a phantom of a sixth person, he would\
have abandoned the charge against Smerdyakov at once in shame and have\
accused that other. But, gentlemen of the jury, why may I not draw the\
very opposite conclusion? There are two persons\'97the prisoner and\
Smerdyakov. Why can I not say that you accuse my client, simply because\
you have no one else to accuse? And you have no one else only because you\
have determined to exclude Smerdyakov from all suspicion.\
\
\'93It\'92s true, indeed, Smerdyakov is accused only by the prisoner, his two\
brothers, and Madame Svyetlov. But there are others who accuse him: there\
are vague rumors of a question, of a suspicion, an obscure report, a\
feeling of expectation. Finally, we have the evidence of a combination of\
facts very suggestive, though, I admit, inconclusive. In the first place\
we have precisely on the day of the catastrophe that fit, for the\
genuineness of which the prosecutor, for some reason, has felt obliged to\
make a careful defense. Then Smerdyakov\'92s sudden suicide on the eve of the\
trial. Then the equally startling evidence given in court to\uc0\u8208 day by the\
elder of the prisoner\'92s brothers, who had believed in his guilt, but has\
to\uc0\u8208 day produced a bundle of notes and proclaimed Smerdyakov as the\
murderer. Oh, I fully share the court\'92s and the prosecutor\'92s conviction\
that Ivan Karamazov is suffering from brain fever, that his statement may\
really be a desperate effort, planned in delirium, to save his brother by\
throwing the guilt on the dead man. But again Smerdyakov\'92s name is\
pronounced, again there is a suggestion of mystery. There is something\
unexplained, incomplete. And perhaps it may one day be explained. But we\
won\'92t go into that now. Of that later.\
\
\'93The court has resolved to go on with the trial, but, meantime, I might\
make a few remarks about the character\uc0\u8208 sketch of Smerdyakov drawn with\
subtlety and talent by the prosecutor. But while I admire his talent I\
cannot agree with him. I have visited Smerdyakov, I have seen him and\
talked to him, and he made a very different impression on me. He was weak\
in health, it is true; but in character, in spirit, he was by no means the\
weak man the prosecutor has made him out to be. I found in him no trace of\
the timidity on which the prosecutor so insisted. There was no simplicity\
about him, either. I found in him, on the contrary, an extreme\
mistrustfulness concealed under a mask of _na\'efvet\'e9_, and an intelligence\
of considerable range. The prosecutor was too simple in taking him for\
weak\uc0\u8208 minded. He made a very definite impression on me: I left him with the\
conviction that he was a distinctly spiteful creature, excessively\
ambitious, vindictive, and intensely envious. I made some inquiries: he\
resented his parentage, was ashamed of it, and would clench his teeth when\
he remembered that he was the son of \'91stinking Lizaveta.\'92 He was\
disrespectful to the servant Grigory and his wife, who had cared for him\
in his childhood. He cursed and jeered at Russia. He dreamed of going to\
France and becoming a Frenchman. He used often to say that he hadn\'92t the\
means to do so. I fancy he loved no one but himself and had a strangely\
high opinion of himself. His conception of culture was limited to good\
clothes, clean shirt\uc0\u8208 fronts and polished boots. Believing himself to be\
the illegitimate son of Fyodor Pavlovitch (there is evidence of this), he\
might well have resented his position, compared with that of his master\'92s\
legitimate sons. They had everything, he nothing. They had all the rights,\
they had the inheritance, while he was only the cook. He told me himself\
that he had helped Fyodor Pavlovitch to put the notes in the envelope. The\
destination of that sum\'97a sum which would have made his career\'97must have\
been hateful to him. Moreover, he saw three thousand roubles in new\
rainbow\uc0\u8208 colored notes. (I asked him about that on purpose.) Oh, beware of\
showing an ambitious and envious man a large sum of money at once! And it\
was the first time he had seen so much money in the hands of one man. The\
sight of the rainbow\uc0\u8208 colored notes may have made a morbid impression on\
his imagination, but with no immediate results.\
\
\'93The talented prosecutor, with extraordinary subtlety, sketched for us all\
the arguments for and against the hypothesis of Smerdyakov\'92s guilt, and\
asked us in particular what motive he had in feigning a fit. But he may\
not have been feigning at all, the fit may have happened quite naturally,\
but it may have passed off quite naturally, and the sick man may have\
recovered, not completely perhaps, but still regaining consciousness, as\
happens with epileptics.\
\
\'93The prosecutor asks at what moment could Smerdyakov have committed the\
murder. But it is very easy to point out that moment. He might have waked\
up from deep sleep (for he was only asleep\'97an epileptic fit is always\
followed by a deep sleep) at that moment when the old Grigory shouted at\
the top of his voice \'91Parricide!\'92 That shout in the dark and stillness may\
have waked Smerdyakov whose sleep may have been less sound at the moment:\
he might naturally have waked up an hour before.\
\
\'93Getting out of bed, he goes almost unconsciously and with no definite\
motive towards the sound to see what\'92s the matter. His head is still\
clouded with his attack, his faculties are half asleep; but, once in the\
garden, he walks to the lighted windows and he hears terrible news from\
his master, who would be, of course, glad to see him. His mind sets to\
work at once. He hears all the details from his frightened master, and\
gradually in his disordered brain there shapes itself an idea\'97terrible,\
but seductive and irresistibly logical. To kill the old man, take the\
three thousand, and throw all the blame on to his young master. A terrible\
lust of money, of booty, might seize upon him as he realized his security\
from detection. Oh! these sudden and irresistible impulses come so often\
when there is a favorable opportunity, and especially with murderers who\
have had no idea of committing a murder beforehand. And Smerdyakov may\
have gone in and carried out his plan. With what weapon? Why, with any\
stone picked up in the garden. But what for, with what object? Why, the\
three thousand which means a career for him. Oh, I am not contradicting\
myself\'97the money may have existed. And perhaps Smerdyakov alone knew where\
to find it, where his master kept it. And the covering of the money\'97the\
torn envelope on the floor?\
\
\'93Just now, when the prosecutor was explaining his subtle theory that only\
an inexperienced thief like Karamazov would have left the envelope on the\
floor, and not one like Smerdyakov, who would have avoided leaving a piece\
of evidence against himself, I thought as I listened that I was hearing\
something very familiar, and, would you believe it, I have heard that very\
argument, that very conjecture, of how Karamazov would have behaved,\
precisely two days before, from Smerdyakov himself. What\'92s more, it struck\
me at the time. I fancied that there was an artificial simplicity about\
him; that he was in a hurry to suggest this idea to me that I might fancy\
it was my own. He insinuated it, as it were. Did he not insinuate the same\
idea at the inquiry and suggest it to the talented prosecutor?\
\
\'93I shall be asked, \'91What about the old woman, Grigory\'92s wife? She heard\
the sick man moaning close by, all night.\'92 Yes, she heard it, but that\
evidence is extremely unreliable. I knew a lady who complained bitterly\
that she had been kept awake all night by a dog in the yard. Yet the poor\
beast, it appeared, had only yelped once or twice in the night. And that\'92s\
natural. If any one is asleep and hears a groan he wakes up, annoyed at\
being waked, but instantly falls asleep again. Two hours later, again a\
groan, he wakes up and falls asleep again; and the same thing again two\
hours later\'97three times altogether in the night. Next morning the sleeper\
wakes up and complains that some one has been groaning all night and\
keeping him awake. And it is bound to seem so to him: the intervals of two\
hours of sleep he does not remember, he only remembers the moments of\
waking, so he feels he has been waked up all night.\
\
\'93But why, why, asks the prosecutor, did not Smerdyakov confess in his last\
letter? Why did his conscience prompt him to one step and not to both?\
But, excuse me, conscience implies penitence, and the suicide may not have\
felt penitence, but only despair. Despair and penitence are two very\
different things. Despair may be vindictive and irreconcilable, and the\
suicide, laying his hands on himself, may well have felt redoubled hatred\
for those whom he had envied all his life.\
\
\'93Gentlemen of the jury, beware of a miscarriage of justice! What is there\
unlikely in all I have put before you just now? Find the error in my\
reasoning; find the impossibility, the absurdity. And if there is but a\
shade of possibility, but a shade of probability in my propositions, do\
not condemn him. And is there only a shade? I swear by all that is sacred,\
I fully believe in the explanation of the murder I have just put forward.\
What troubles me and makes me indignant is that of all the mass of facts\
heaped up by the prosecution against the prisoner, there is not a single\
one certain and irrefutable. And yet the unhappy man is to be ruined by\
the accumulation of these facts. Yes, the accumulated effect is awful: the\
blood, the blood dripping from his fingers, the bloodstained shirt, the\
dark night resounding with the shout \'91Parricide!\'92 and the old man falling\
with a broken head. And then the mass of phrases, statements, gestures,\
shouts! Oh! this has so much influence, it can so bias the mind; but,\
gentlemen of the jury, can it bias your minds? Remember, you have been\
given absolute power to bind and to loose, but the greater the power, the\
more terrible its responsibility.\
\
\'93I do not draw back one iota from what I have said just now, but suppose\
for one moment I agreed with the prosecution that my luckless client had\
stained his hands with his father\'92s blood. This is only hypothesis, I\
repeat; I never for one instant doubt of his innocence. But, so be it, I\
assume that my client is guilty of parricide. Even so, hear what I have to\
say. I have it in my heart to say something more to you, for I feel that\
there must be a great conflict in your hearts and minds.... Forgive my\
referring to your hearts and minds, gentlemen of the jury, but I want to\
be truthful and sincere to the end. Let us all be sincere!\'94\
\
At this point the speech was interrupted by rather loud applause. The last\
words, indeed, were pronounced with a note of such sincerity that every\
one felt that he really might have something to say, and that what he was\
about to say would be of the greatest consequence. But the President,\
hearing the applause, in a loud voice threatened to clear the court if\
such an incident were repeated. Every sound was hushed and Fetyukovitch\
began in a voice full of feeling quite unlike the tone he had used\
hitherto.\
\
\
\
Chapter XIII. A Corrupter Of Thought\
\
\
\'93It\'92s not only the accumulation of facts that threatens my client with\
ruin, gentlemen of the jury,\'94 he began, \'93what is really damning for my\
client is one fact\'97the dead body of his father. Had it been an ordinary\
case of murder you would have rejected the charge in view of the\
triviality, the incompleteness, and the fantastic character of the\
evidence, if you examine each part of it separately; or, at least, you\
would have hesitated to ruin a man\'92s life simply from the prejudice\
against him which he has, alas! only too well deserved. But it\'92s not an\
ordinary case of murder, it\'92s a case of parricide. That impresses men\'92s\
minds, and to such a degree that the very triviality and incompleteness of\
the evidence becomes less trivial and less incomplete even to an\
unprejudiced mind. How can such a prisoner be acquitted? What if he\
committed the murder and gets off unpunished? That is what every one,\
almost involuntarily, instinctively, feels at heart.\
\
\'93Yes, it\'92s a fearful thing to shed a father\'92s blood\'97the father who has\
begotten me, loved me, not spared his life for me, grieved over my\
illnesses from childhood up, troubled all his life for my happiness, and\
has lived in my joys, in my successes. To murder such a father\'97that\'92s\
inconceivable. Gentlemen of the jury, what is a father\'97a real father? What\
is the meaning of that great word? What is the great idea in that name? We\
have just indicated in part what a true father is and what he ought to be.\
In the case in which we are now so deeply occupied and over which our\
hearts are aching\'97in the present case, the father, Fyodor Pavlovitch\
Karamazov, did not correspond to that conception of a father to which we\
have just referred. That\'92s the misfortune. And indeed some fathers are a\
misfortune. Let us examine this misfortune rather more closely: we must\
shrink from nothing, gentlemen of the jury, considering the importance of\
the decision you have to make. It\'92s our particular duty not to shrink from\
any idea, like children or frightened women, as the talented prosecutor\
happily expresses it.\
\
\'93But in the course of his heated speech my esteemed opponent (and he was\
my opponent before I opened my lips) exclaimed several times, \'91Oh, I will\
not yield the defense of the prisoner to the lawyer who has come down from\
Petersburg. I accuse, but I defend also!\'92 He exclaimed that several times,\
but forgot to mention that if this terrible prisoner was for twenty\uc0\u8208 three\
years so grateful for a mere pound of nuts given him by the only man who\
had been kind to him, as a child in his father\'92s house, might not such a\
man well have remembered for twenty\uc0\u8208 three years how he ran in his father\'92s\
back\uc0\u8208 yard, \'91without boots on his feet and with his little trousers hanging\
by one button\'92\'97to use the expression of the kind\uc0\u8208 hearted doctor,\
Herzenstube?\
\
\'93Oh, gentlemen of the jury, why need we look more closely at this\
misfortune, why repeat what we all know already? What did my client meet\
with when he arrived here, at his father\'92s house, and why depict my client\
as a heartless egoist and monster? He is uncontrolled, he is wild and\
unruly\'97we are trying him now for that\'97but who is responsible for his life?\
Who is responsible for his having received such an unseemly bringing up,\
in spite of his excellent disposition and his grateful and sensitive\
heart? Did any one train him to be reasonable? Was he enlightened by\
study? Did any one love him ever so little in his childhood? My client was\
left to the care of Providence like a beast of the field. He thirsted\
perhaps to see his father after long years of separation. A thousand times\
perhaps he may, recalling his childhood, have driven away the loathsome\
phantoms that haunted his childish dreams and with all his heart he may\
have longed to embrace and to forgive his father! And what awaited him? He\
was met by cynical taunts, suspicions and wrangling about money. He heard\
nothing but revolting talk and vicious precepts uttered daily over the\
brandy, and at last he saw his father seducing his mistress from him with\
his own money. Oh, gentlemen of the jury, that was cruel and revolting!\
And that old man was always complaining of the disrespect and cruelty of\
his son. He slandered him in society, injured him, calumniated him, bought\
up his unpaid debts to get him thrown into prison.\
\
\'93Gentlemen of the jury, people like my client, who are fierce, unruly, and\
uncontrolled on the surface, are sometimes, most frequently indeed,\
exceedingly tender\uc0\u8208 hearted, only they don\'92t express it. Don\'92t laugh, don\'92t\
laugh at my idea! The talented prosecutor laughed mercilessly just now at\
my client for loving Schiller\'97loving the sublime and beautiful! I should\
not have laughed at that in his place. Yes, such natures\'97oh, let me speak\
in defense of such natures, so often and so cruelly misunderstood\'97these\
natures often thirst for tenderness, goodness, and justice, as it were, in\
contrast to themselves, their unruliness, their ferocity\'97they thirst for\
it unconsciously. Passionate and fierce on the surface, they are painfully\
capable of loving woman, for instance, and with a spiritual and elevated\
love. Again do not laugh at me, this is very often the case in such\
natures. But they cannot hide their passions\'97sometimes very coarse\'97and\
that is conspicuous and is noticed, but the inner man is unseen. Their\
passions are quickly exhausted; but, by the side of a noble and lofty\
creature that seemingly coarse and rough man seeks a new life, seeks to\
correct himself, to be better, to become noble and honorable, \'91sublime and\
beautiful,\'92 however much the expression has been ridiculed.\
\
\'93I said just now that I would not venture to touch upon my client\'92s\
engagement. But I may say half a word. What we heard just now was not\
evidence, but only the scream of a frenzied and revengeful woman, and it\
was not for her\'97oh, not for her!\'97to reproach him with treachery, for she\
has betrayed him! If she had had but a little time for reflection she\
would not have given such evidence. Oh, do not believe her! No, my client\
is not a monster, as she called him!\
\
\'93The Lover of Mankind on the eve of His Crucifixion said: \'91I am the Good\
Shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep, so that not\
one of them might be lost.\'92 Let not a man\'92s soul be lost through us!\
\
\'93I asked just now what does \'91father\'92 mean, and exclaimed that it was a\
great word, a precious name. But one must use words honestly, gentlemen,\
and I venture to call things by their right names: such a father as old\
Karamazov cannot be called a father and does not deserve to be. Filial\
love for an unworthy father is an absurdity, an impossibility. Love cannot\
be created from nothing: only God can create something from nothing.\
\
\'93 \'91Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath,\'92 the apostle writes, from\
a heart glowing with love. It\'92s not for the sake of my client that I quote\
these sacred words, I mention them for all fathers. Who has authorized me\
to preach to fathers? No one. But as a man and a citizen I make my\
appeal\'97_vivos voco!_ We are not long on earth, we do many evil deeds and\
say many evil words. So let us all catch a favorable moment when we are\
all together to say a good word to each other. That\'92s what I am doing:\
while I am in this place I take advantage of my opportunity. Not for\
nothing is this tribune given us by the highest authority\'97all Russia hears\
us! I am not speaking only for the fathers here present, I cry aloud to\
all fathers: \'91Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath.\'92 Yes, let us\
first fulfill Christ\'92s injunction ourselves and only then venture to\
expect it of our children. Otherwise we are not fathers, but enemies of\
our children, and they are not our children, but our enemies, and we have\
made them our enemies ourselves. \'91What measure ye mete it shall be\
measured unto you again\'92\'97it\'92s not I who say that, it\'92s the Gospel precept,\
measure to others according as they measure to you. How can we blame\
children if they measure us according to our measure?\
\
\'93Not long ago a servant girl in Finland was suspected of having secretly\
given birth to a child. She was watched, and a box of which no one knew\
anything was found in the corner of the loft, behind some bricks. It was\
opened and inside was found the body of a new\uc0\u8208 born child which she had\
killed. In the same box were found the skeletons of two other babies\
which, according to her own confession, she had killed at the moment of\
their birth.\
\
\'93Gentlemen of the jury, was she a mother to her children? She gave birth\
to them, indeed; but was she a mother to them? Would any one venture to\
give her the sacred name of mother? Let us be bold, gentlemen, let us be\
audacious even: it\'92s our duty to be so at this moment and not to be afraid\
of certain words and ideas like the Moscow women in Ostrovsky\'92s play, who\
are scared at the sound of certain words. No, let us prove that the\
progress of the last few years has touched even us, and let us say\
plainly, the father is not merely he who begets the child, but he who\
begets it and does his duty by it.\
\
\'93Oh, of course, there is the other meaning, there is the other\
interpretation of the word \'91father,\'92 which insists that any father, even\
though he be a monster, even though he be the enemy of his children, still\
remains my father simply because he begot me. But this is, so to say, the\
mystical meaning which I cannot comprehend with my intellect, but can only\
accept by faith, or, better to say, _on faith_, like many other things\
which I do not understand, but which religion bids me believe. But in that\
case let it be kept outside the sphere of actual life. In the sphere of\
actual life, which has, indeed, its own rights, but also lays upon us\
great duties and obligations, in that sphere, if we want to be\
humane\'97Christian, in fact\'97we must, or ought to, act only upon convictions\
justified by reason and experience, which have been passed through the\
crucible of analysis; in a word, we must act rationally, and not as though\
in dream and delirium, that we may not do harm, that we may not ill\uc0\u8208 treat\
and ruin a man. Then it will be real Christian work, not only mystic, but\
rational and philanthropic....\'94\
\
There was violent applause at this passage from many parts of the court,\
but Fetyukovitch waved his hands as though imploring them to let him\
finish without interruption. The court relapsed into silence at once. The\
orator went on.\
\
\'93Do you suppose, gentlemen, that our children as they grow up and begin to\
reason can avoid such questions? No, they cannot, and we will not impose\
on them an impossible restriction. The sight of an unworthy father\
involuntarily suggests tormenting questions to a young creature,\
especially when he compares him with the excellent fathers of his\
companions. The conventional answer to this question is: \'91He begot you,\
and you are his flesh and blood, and therefore you are bound to love him.\'92\
The youth involuntarily reflects: \'91But did he love me when he begot me?\'92\
he asks, wondering more and more. \'91Was it for my sake he begot me? He did\
not know me, not even my sex, at that moment, at the moment of passion,\
perhaps, inflamed by wine, and he has only transmitted to me a propensity\
to drunkenness\'97that\'92s all he\'92s done for me.... Why am I bound to love him\
simply for begetting me when he has cared nothing for me all my life\
after?\'92\
\
\'93Oh, perhaps those questions strike you as coarse and cruel, but do not\
expect an impossible restraint from a young mind. \'91Drive nature out of the\
door and it will fly in at the window,\'92 and, above all, let us not be\
afraid of words, but decide the question according to the dictates of\
reason and humanity and not of mystic ideas. How shall it be decided? Why,\
like this. Let the son stand before his father and ask him, \'91Father, tell\
me, why must I love you? Father, show me that I must love you,\'92 and if\
that father is able to answer him and show him good reason, we have a\
real, normal, parental relation, not resting on mystical prejudice, but on\
a rational, responsible and strictly humanitarian basis. But if he does\
not, there\'92s an end to the family tie. He is not a father to him, and the\
son has a right to look upon him as a stranger, and even an enemy. Our\
tribune, gentlemen of the jury, ought to be a school of true and sound\
ideas.\'94\
\
(Here the orator was interrupted by irrepressible and almost frantic\
applause. Of course, it was not the whole audience, but a good half of it\
applauded. The fathers and mothers present applauded. Shrieks and\
exclamations were heard from the gallery, where the ladies were sitting.\
Handkerchiefs were waved. The President began ringing his bell with all\
his might. He was obviously irritated by the behavior of the audience, but\
did not venture to clear the court as he had threatened. Even persons of\
high position, old men with stars on their breasts, sitting on specially\
reserved seats behind the judges, applauded the orator and waved their\
handkerchiefs. So that when the noise died down, the President confined\
himself to repeating his stern threat to clear the court, and\
Fetyukovitch, excited and triumphant, continued his speech.)\
\
\'93Gentlemen of the jury, you remember that awful night of which so much has\
been said to\uc0\u8208 day, when the son got over the fence and stood face to face\
with the enemy and persecutor who had begotten him. I insist most\
emphatically it was not for money he ran to his father\'92s house: the charge\
of robbery is an absurdity, as I proved before. And it was not to murder\
him he broke into the house, oh, no! If he had had that design he would,\
at least, have taken the precaution of arming himself beforehand. The\
brass pestle he caught up instinctively without knowing why he did it.\
Granted that he deceived his father by tapping at the window, granted that\
he made his way in\'97I\'92ve said already that I do not for a moment believe\
that legend, but let it be so, let us suppose it for a moment. Gentlemen,\
I swear to you by all that\'92s holy, if it had not been his father, but an\
ordinary enemy, he would, after running through the rooms and satisfying\
himself that the woman was not there, have made off, post\uc0\u8208 haste, without\
doing any harm to his rival. He would have struck him, pushed him away\
perhaps, nothing more, for he had no thought and no time to spare for\
that. What he wanted to know was where she was. But his father, his\
father! The mere sight of the father who had hated him from his childhood,\
had been his enemy, his persecutor, and now his unnatural rival, was\
enough! A feeling of hatred came over him involuntarily, irresistibly,\
clouding his reason. It all surged up in one moment! It was an impulse of\
madness and insanity, but also an impulse of nature, irresistibly and\
unconsciously (like everything in nature) avenging the violation of its\
eternal laws.\
\
\'93But the prisoner even then did not murder him\'97I maintain that, I cry that\
aloud!\'97no, he only brandished the pestle in a burst of indignant disgust,\
not meaning to kill him, not knowing that he would kill him. Had he not\
had this fatal pestle in his hand, he would have only knocked his father\
down perhaps, but would not have killed him. As he ran away, he did not\
know whether he had killed the old man. Such a murder is not a murder.\
Such a murder is not a parricide. No, the murder of such a father cannot\
be called parricide. Such a murder can only be reckoned parricide by\
prejudice.\
\
\'93But I appeal to you again and again from the depths of my soul; did this\
murder actually take place? Gentlemen of the jury, if we convict and\
punish him, he will say to himself: \'91These people have done nothing for my\
bringing up, for my education, nothing to improve my lot, nothing to make\
me better, nothing to make me a man. These people have not given me to eat\
and to drink, have not visited me in prison and nakedness, and here they\
have sent me to penal servitude. I am quits, I owe them nothing now, and\
owe no one anything for ever. They are wicked and I will be wicked. They\
are cruel and I will be cruel.\'92 That is what he will say, gentlemen of the\
jury. And I swear, by finding him guilty you will only make it easier for\
him: you will ease his conscience, he will curse the blood he has shed and\
will not regret it. At the same time you will destroy in him the\
possibility of becoming a new man, for he will remain in his wickedness\
and blindness all his life.\
\
\'93But do you want to punish him fearfully, terribly, with the most awful\
punishment that could be imagined, and at the same time to save him and\
regenerate his soul? If so, overwhelm him with your mercy! You will see,\
you will hear how he will tremble and be horror\uc0\u8208 struck. \'91How can I endure\
this mercy? How can I endure so much love? Am I worthy of it?\'92 That\'92s what\
he will exclaim.\
\
\'93Oh, I know, I know that heart, that wild but grateful heart, gentlemen of\
the jury! It will bow before your mercy; it thirsts for a great and loving\
action, it will melt and mount upwards. There are souls which, in their\
limitation, blame the whole world. But subdue such a soul with mercy, show\
it love, and it will curse its past, for there are many good impulses in\
it. Such a heart will expand and see that God is merciful and that men are\
good and just. He will be horror\uc0\u8208 stricken; he will be crushed by remorse\
and the vast obligation laid upon him henceforth. And he will not say\
then, \'91I am quits,\'92 but will say, \'91I am guilty in the sight of all men and\
am more unworthy than all.\'92 With tears of penitence and poignant, tender\
anguish, he will exclaim: \'91Others are better than I, they wanted to save\
me, not to ruin me!\'92 Oh, this act of mercy is so easy for you, for in the\
absence of anything like real evidence it will be too awful for you to\
pronounce: \'91Yes, he is guilty.\'92\
\
\'93Better acquit ten guilty men than punish one innocent man! Do you hear,\
do you hear that majestic voice from the past century of our glorious\
history? It is not for an insignificant person like me to remind you that\
the Russian court does not exist for the punishment only, but also for the\
salvation of the criminal! Let other nations think of retribution and the\
letter of the law, we will cling to the spirit and the meaning\'97the\
salvation and the reformation of the lost. If this is true, if Russia and\
her justice are such, she may go forward with good cheer! Do not try to\
scare us with your frenzied troikas from which all the nations stand aside\
in disgust. Not a runaway troika, but the stately chariot of Russia will\
move calmly and majestically to its goal. In your hands is the fate of my\
client, in your hands is the fate of Russian justice. You will defend it,\
you will save it, you will prove that there are men to watch over it, that\
it is in good hands!\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter XIV. The Peasants Stand Firm\
\
\
This was how Fetyukovitch concluded his speech, and the enthusiasm of the\
audience burst like an irresistible storm. It was out of the question to\
stop it: the women wept, many of the men wept too, even two important\
personages shed tears. The President submitted, and even postponed ringing\
his bell. The suppression of such an enthusiasm would be the suppression\
of something sacred, as the ladies cried afterwards. The orator himself\
was genuinely touched.\
\
And it was at this moment that Ippolit Kirillovitch got up to make certain\
objections. People looked at him with hatred. \'93What? What\'92s the meaning of\
it? He positively dares to make objections,\'94 the ladies babbled. But if\
the whole world of ladies, including his wife, had protested he could not\
have been stopped at that moment. He was pale, he was shaking with\
emotion, his first phrases were even unintelligible, he gasped for breath,\
could hardly speak clearly, lost the thread. But he soon recovered\
himself. Of this new speech of his I will quote only a few sentences.\
\
\'93... I am reproached with having woven a romance. But what is this defense\
if not one romance on the top of another? All that was lacking was poetry.\
Fyodor Pavlovitch, while waiting for his mistress, tears open the envelope\
and throws it on the floor. We are even told what he said while engaged in\
this strange act. Is not this a flight of fancy? And what proof have we\
that he had taken out the money? Who heard what he said? The weak\uc0\u8208 minded\
idiot, Smerdyakov, transformed into a Byronic hero, avenging society for\
his illegitimate birth\'97isn\'92t this a romance in the Byronic style? And the\
son who breaks into his father\'92s house and murders him without murdering\
him is not even a romance\'97this is a sphinx setting us a riddle which he\
cannot solve himself. If he murdered him, he murdered him, and what\'92s the\
meaning of his murdering him without having murdered him\'97who can make head\
or tail of this?\
\
\'93Then we are admonished that our tribune is a tribune of true and sound\
ideas and from this tribune of \'91sound ideas\'92 is heard a solemn declaration\
that to call the murder of a father \'91parricide\'92 is nothing but a\
prejudice! But if parricide is a prejudice, and if every child is to ask\
his father why he is to love him, what will become of us? What will become\
of the foundations of society? What will become of the family? Parricide,\
it appears, is only a bogy of Moscow merchants\'92 wives. The most precious,\
the most sacred guarantees for the destiny and future of Russian justice\
are presented to us in a perverted and frivolous form, simply to attain an\
object\'97to obtain the justification of something which cannot be justified.\
\'91Oh, crush him by mercy,\'92 cries the counsel for the defense; but that\'92s\
all the criminal wants, and to\uc0\u8208 morrow it will be seen how much he is\
crushed. And is not the counsel for the defense too modest in asking only\
for the acquittal of the prisoner? Why not found a charity in the honor of\
the parricide to commemorate his exploit among future generations?\
Religion and the Gospel are corrected\'97that\'92s all mysticism, we are told,\
and ours is the only true Christianity which has been subjected to the\
analysis of reason and common sense. And so they set up before us a false\
semblance of Christ! \'91What measure ye mete so it shall be meted unto you\
again,\'92 cried the counsel for the defense, and instantly deduces that\
Christ teaches us to measure as it is measured to us\'97and this from the\
tribune of truth and sound sense! We peep into the Gospel only on the eve\
of making speeches, in order to dazzle the audience by our acquaintance\
with what is, anyway, a rather original composition, which may be of use\
to produce a certain effect\'97all to serve the purpose! But what Christ\
commands us is something very different: He bids us beware of doing this,\
because the wicked world does this, but we ought to forgive and to turn\
the other cheek, and not to measure to our persecutors as they measure to\
us. This is what our God has taught us and not that to forbid children to\
murder their fathers is a prejudice. And we will not from the tribune of\
truth and good sense correct the Gospel of our Lord, Whom the counsel for\
the defense deigns to call only \'91the crucified lover of humanity,\'92 in\
opposition to all orthodox Russia, which calls to Him, \'91For Thou art our\
God!\'92 \'94\
\
At this the President intervened and checked the over\uc0\u8208 zealous speaker,\
begging him not to exaggerate, not to overstep the bounds, and so on, as\
presidents always do in such cases. The audience, too, was uneasy. The\
public was restless: there were even exclamations of indignation.\
Fetyukovitch did not so much as reply; he only mounted the tribune to lay\
his hand on his heart and, with an offended voice, utter a few words full\
of dignity. He only touched again, lightly and ironically, on \'93romancing\'94\
and \'93psychology,\'94 and in an appropriate place quoted, \'93Jupiter, you are\
angry, therefore you are wrong,\'94 which provoked a burst of approving\
laughter in the audience, for Ippolit Kirillovitch was by no means like\
Jupiter. Then, _\'e0 propos_ of the accusation that he was teaching the young\
generation to murder their fathers, Fetyukovitch observed, with great\
dignity, that he would not even answer. As for the prosecutor\'92s charge of\
uttering unorthodox opinions, Fetyukovitch hinted that it was a personal\
insinuation and that he had expected in this court to be secure from\
accusations \'93damaging to my reputation as a citizen and a loyal subject.\'94\
But at these words the President pulled him up, too, and Fetyukovitch\
concluded his speech with a bow, amid a hum of approbation in the court.\
And Ippolit Kirillovitch was, in the opinion of our ladies, \'93crushed for\
good.\'94\
\
Then the prisoner was allowed to speak. Mitya stood up, but said very\
little. He was fearfully exhausted, physically and mentally. The look of\
strength and independence with which he had entered in the morning had\
almost disappeared. He seemed as though he had passed through an\
experience that day, which had taught him for the rest of his life\
something very important he had not understood till then. His voice was\
weak, he did not shout as before. In his words there was a new note of\
humility, defeat and submission.\
\
\'93What am I to say, gentlemen of the jury? The hour of judgment has come\
for me, I feel the hand of God upon me! The end has come to an erring man!\
But, before God, I repeat to you, I am innocent of my father\'92s blood! For\
the last time I repeat, it wasn\'92t I killed him! I was erring, but I loved\
what is good. Every instant I strove to reform, but I lived like a wild\
beast. I thank the prosecutor, he told me many things about myself that I\
did not know; but it\'92s not true that I killed my father, the prosecutor is\
mistaken. I thank my counsel, too. I cried listening to him; but it\'92s not\
true that I killed my father, and he needn\'92t have supposed it. And don\'92t\
believe the doctors. I am perfectly sane, only my heart is heavy. If you\
spare me, if you let me go, I will pray for you. I will be a better man. I\
give you my word before God I will! And if you will condemn me, I\'92ll break\
my sword over my head myself and kiss the pieces. But spare me, do not rob\
me of my God! I know myself, I shall rebel! My heart is heavy, gentlemen\
... spare me!\'94\
\
He almost fell back in his place: his voice broke: he could hardly\
articulate the last phrase. Then the judges proceeded to put the questions\
and began to ask both sides to formulate their conclusions.\
\
But I will not describe the details. At last the jury rose to retire for\
consultation. The President was very tired, and so his last charge to the\
jury was rather feeble. \'93Be impartial, don\'92t be influenced by the\
eloquence of the defense, but yet weigh the arguments. Remember that there\
is a great responsibility laid upon you,\'94 and so on and so on.\
\
The jury withdrew and the court adjourned. People could get up, move\
about, exchange their accumulated impressions, refresh themselves at the\
buffet. It was very late, almost one o\'92clock in the night, but nobody went\
away: the strain was so great that no one could think of repose. All\
waited with sinking hearts; though that is, perhaps, too much to say, for\
the ladies were only in a state of hysterical impatience and their hearts\
were untroubled. An acquittal, they thought, was inevitable. They all\
prepared themselves for a dramatic moment of general enthusiasm. I must\
own there were many among the men, too, who were convinced that an\
acquittal was inevitable. Some were pleased, others frowned, while some\
were simply dejected, not wanting him to be acquitted. Fetyukovitch\
himself was confident of his success. He was surrounded by people\
congratulating him and fawning upon him.\
\
\'93There are,\'94 he said to one group, as I was told afterwards, \'93there are\
invisible threads binding the counsel for the defense with the jury. One\
feels during one\'92s speech if they are being formed. I was aware of them.\
They exist. Our cause is won. Set your mind at rest.\'94\
\
\'93What will our peasants say now?\'94 said one stout, cross\uc0\u8208 looking, pock\u8208 \
marked gentleman, a landowner of the neighborhood, approaching a group of\
gentlemen engaged in conversation.\
\
\'93But they are not all peasants. There are four government clerks among\
them.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, there are clerks,\'94 said a member of the district council, joining\
the group.\
\
\'93And do you know that Nazaryev, the merchant with the medal, a juryman?\'94\
\
\'93What of him?\'94\
\
\'93He is a man with brains.\'94\
\
\'93But he never speaks.\'94\
\
\'93He is no great talker, but so much the better. There\'92s no need for the\
Petersburg man to teach him: he could teach all Petersburg himself. He\'92s\
the father of twelve children. Think of that!\'94\
\
\'93Upon my word, you don\'92t suppose they won\'92t acquit him?\'94 one of our young\
officials exclaimed in another group.\
\
\'93They\'92ll acquit him for certain,\'94 said a resolute voice.\
\
\'93It would be shameful, disgraceful, not to acquit him!\'94 cried the\
official. \'93Suppose he did murder him\'97there are fathers and fathers! And,\
besides, he was in such a frenzy.... He really may have done nothing but\
swing the pestle in the air, and so knocked the old man down. But it was a\
pity they dragged the valet in. That was simply an absurd theory! If I\'92d\
been in Fetyukovitch\'92s place, I should simply have said straight out: \'91He\
murdered him; but he is not guilty, hang it all!\'92 \'94\
\
\'93That\'92s what he did, only without saying, \'91Hang it all!\'92 \'94\
\
\'93No, Mihail Semyonovitch, he almost said that, too,\'94 put in a third voice.\
\
\'93Why, gentlemen, in Lent an actress was acquitted in our town who had cut\
the throat of her lover\'92s lawful wife.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, but she did not finish cutting it.\'94\
\
\'93That makes no difference. She began cutting it.\'94\
\
\'93What did you think of what he said about children? Splendid, wasn\'92t it?\'94\
\
\'93Splendid!\'94\
\
\'93And about mysticism, too!\'94\
\
\'93Oh, drop mysticism, do!\'94 cried some one else; \'93think of Ippolit and his\
fate from this day forth. His wife will scratch his eyes out to\uc0\u8208 morrow for\
Mitya\'92s sake.\'94\
\
\'93Is she here?\'94\
\
\'93What an idea! If she\'92d been here she\'92d have scratched them out in court.\
She is at home with toothache. He he he!\'94\
\
\'93He he he!\'94\
\
In a third group:\
\
\'93I dare say they will acquit Mitenka, after all.\'94\
\
\'93I should not be surprised if he turns the \'91Metropolis\'92 upside down to\uc0\u8208 \
morrow. He will be drinking for ten days!\'94\
\
\'93Oh, the devil!\'94\
\
\'93The devil\'92s bound to have a hand in it. Where should he be if not here?\'94\
\
\'93Well, gentlemen, I admit it was eloquent. But still it\'92s not the thing to\
break your father\'92s head with a pestle! Or what are we coming to?\'94\
\
\'93The chariot! Do you remember the chariot?\'94\
\
\'93Yes; he turned a cart into a chariot!\'94\
\
\'93And to\uc0\u8208 morrow he will turn a chariot into a cart, just to suit his\
purpose.\'94\
\
\'93What cunning chaps there are nowadays! Is there any justice to be had in\
Russia?\'94\
\
But the bell rang. The jury deliberated for exactly an hour, neither more\
nor less. A profound silence reigned in the court as soon as the public\
had taken their seats. I remember how the jurymen walked into the court.\
At last! I won\'92t repeat the questions in order, and, indeed, I have\
forgotten them. I remember only the answer to the President\'92s first and\
chief question: \'93Did the prisoner commit the murder for the sake of\
robbery and with premeditation?\'94 (I don\'92t remember the exact words.) There\
was a complete hush. The foreman of the jury, the youngest of the clerks,\
pronounced, in a clear, loud voice, amidst the deathlike stillness of the\
court:\
\
\'93Yes, guilty!\'94\
\
And the same answer was repeated to every question: \'93Yes, guilty!\'94 and\
without the slightest extenuating comment. This no one had expected;\
almost every one had reckoned upon a recommendation to mercy, at least.\
The deathlike silence in the court was not broken\'97all seemed petrified:\
those who desired his conviction as well as those who had been eager for\
his acquittal. But that was only for the first instant, and it was\
followed by a fearful hubbub. Many of the men in the audience were\
pleased. Some were rubbing their hands with no attempt to conceal their\
joy. Those who disagreed with the verdict seemed crushed, shrugged their\
shoulders, whispered, but still seemed unable to realize this. But how\
shall I describe the state the ladies were in? I thought they would create\
a riot. At first they could scarcely believe their ears. Then suddenly the\
whole court rang with exclamations: \'93What\'92s the meaning of it? What next?\'94\
They leapt up from their places. They seemed to fancy that it might be at\
once reconsidered and reversed. At that instant Mitya suddenly stood up\
and cried in a heartrending voice, stretching his hands out before him:\
\
\'93I swear by God and the dreadful Day of Judgment I am not guilty of my\
father\'92s blood! Katya, I forgive you! Brothers, friends, have pity on the\
other woman!\'94\
\
He could not go on, and broke into a terrible sobbing wail that was heard\
all over the court in a strange, unnatural voice unlike his own. From the\
farthest corner at the back of the gallery came a piercing shriek\'97it was\
Grushenka. She had succeeded in begging admittance to the court again\
before the beginning of the lawyers\'92 speeches. Mitya was taken away. The\
passing of the sentence was deferred till next day. The whole court was in\
a hubbub but I did not wait to hear. I only remember a few exclamations I\
heard on the steps as I went out.\
\
\'93He\'92ll have a twenty years\'92 trip to the mines!\'94\
\
\'93Not less.\'94\
\
\'93Well, our peasants have stood firm.\'94\
\
\'93And have done for our Mitya.\'94\
\
\
\
\
\
EPILOGUE\
\
\
\
\
Chapter I. Plans For Mitya\'92s Escape\
\
\
Very early, at nine o\'92clock in the morning, five days after the trial,\
Alyosha went to Katerina Ivanovna\'92s to talk over a matter of great\
importance to both of them, and to give her a message. She sat and talked\
to him in the very room in which she had once received Grushenka. In the\
next room Ivan Fyodorovitch lay unconscious in a high fever. Katerina\
Ivanovna had immediately after the scene at the trial ordered the sick and\
unconscious man to be carried to her house, disregarding the inevitable\
gossip and general disapproval of the public. One of the two relations who\
lived with her had departed to Moscow immediately after the scene in\
court, the other remained. But if both had gone away, Katerina Ivanovna\
would have adhered to her resolution, and would have gone on nursing the\
sick man and sitting by him day and night. Varvinsky and Herzenstube were\
attending him. The famous doctor had gone back to Moscow, refusing to give\
an opinion as to the probable end of the illness. Though the doctors\
encouraged Katerina Ivanovna and Alyosha, it was evident that they could\
not yet give them positive hopes of recovery.\
\
Alyosha came to see his sick brother twice a day. But this time he had\
specially urgent business, and he foresaw how difficult it would be to\
approach the subject, yet he was in great haste. He had another engagement\
that could not be put off for that same morning, and there was need of\
haste.\
\
They had been talking for a quarter of an hour. Katerina Ivanovna was pale\
and terribly fatigued, yet at the same time in a state of hysterical\
excitement. She had a presentiment of the reason why Alyosha had come to\
her.\
\
\'93Don\'92t worry about his decision,\'94 she said, with confident emphasis to\
Alyosha. \'93One way or another he is bound to come to it. He must escape.\
That unhappy man, that hero of honor and principle\'97not he, not Dmitri\
Fyodorovitch, but the man lying the other side of that door, who has\
sacrificed himself for his brother,\'94 Katya added, with flashing eyes\'97\'93told\
me the whole plan of escape long ago. You know he has already entered into\
negotiations.... I\'92ve told you something already.... You see, it will\
probably come off at the third _\'e9tape_ from here, when the party of\
prisoners is being taken to Siberia. Oh, it\'92s a long way off yet. Ivan\
Fyodorovitch has already visited the superintendent of the third _\'e9tape_.\
But we don\'92t know yet who will be in charge of the party, and it\'92s\
impossible to find that out so long beforehand. To\uc0\u8208 morrow perhaps I will\
show you in detail the whole plan which Ivan Fyodorovitch left me on the\
eve of the trial in case of need.... That was when\'97do you remember?\'97you\
found us quarreling. He had just gone down\uc0\u8208 stairs, but seeing you I made\
him come back; do you remember? Do you know what we were quarreling about\
then?\'94\
\
\'93No, I don\'92t,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93Of course he did not tell you. It was about that plan of escape. He had\
told me the main idea three days before, and we began quarreling about it\
at once and quarreled for three days. We quarreled because, when he told\
me that if Dmitri Fyodorovitch were convicted he would escape abroad with\
that creature, I felt furious at once\'97I can\'92t tell you why, I don\'92t know\
myself why.... Oh, of course, I was furious then about that creature, and\
that she, too, should go abroad with Dmitri!\'94 Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed\
suddenly, her lips quivering with anger. \'93As soon as Ivan Fyodorovitch saw\
that I was furious about that woman, he instantly imagined I was jealous\
of Dmitri and that I still loved Dmitri. That is how our first quarrel\
began. I would not give an explanation, I could not ask forgiveness. I\
could not bear to think that such a man could suspect me of still loving\
that ... and when I myself had told him long before that I did not love\
Dmitri, that I loved no one but him! It was only resentment against that\
creature that made me angry with him. Three days later, on the evening you\
came, he brought me a sealed envelope, which I was to open at once, if\
anything happened to him. Oh, he foresaw his illness! He told me that the\
envelope contained the details of the escape, and that if he died or was\
taken dangerously ill, I was to save Mitya alone. Then he left me money,\
nearly ten thousand\'97those notes to which the prosecutor referred in his\
speech, having learnt from some one that he had sent them to be changed. I\
was tremendously impressed to find that Ivan Fyodorovitch had not given up\
his idea of saving his brother, and was confiding this plan of escape to\
me, though he was still jealous of me and still convinced that I loved\
Mitya. Oh, that was a sacrifice! No, you cannot understand the greatness\
of such self\uc0\u8208 sacrifice, Alexey Fyodorovitch. I wanted to fall at his feet\
in reverence, but I thought at once that he would take it only for my joy\
at the thought of Mitya\'92s being saved (and he certainly would have\
imagined that!), and I was so exasperated at the mere possibility of such\
an unjust thought on his part that I lost my temper again, and instead of\
kissing his feet, flew into a fury again! Oh, I am unhappy! It\'92s my\
character, my awful, unhappy character! Oh, you will see, I shall end by\
driving him, too, to abandon me for another with whom he can get on\
better, like Dmitri. But ... no, I could not bear it, I should kill\
myself. And when you came in then, and when I called to you and told him\
to come back, I was so enraged by the look of contempt and hatred he\
turned on me that\'97do you remember?\'97I cried out to you that it was he, he\
alone who had persuaded me that his brother Dmitri was a murderer! I said\
that malicious thing on purpose to wound him again. He had never, never\
persuaded me that his brother was a murderer. On the contrary, it was I\
who persuaded him! Oh, my vile temper was the cause of everything! I paved\
the way to that hideous scene at the trial. He wanted to show me that he\
was an honorable man, and that, even if I loved his brother, he would not\
ruin him for revenge or jealousy. So he came to the court ... I am the\
cause of it all, I alone am to blame!\'94\
\
Katya never had made such confessions to Alyosha before, and he felt that\
she was now at that stage of unbearable suffering when even the proudest\
heart painfully crushes its pride and falls vanquished by grief. Oh,\
Alyosha knew another terrible reason of her present misery, though she had\
carefully concealed it from him during those days since the trial; but it\
would have been for some reason too painful to him if she had been brought\
so low as to speak to him now about that. She was suffering for her\
\'93treachery\'94 at the trial, and Alyosha felt that her conscience was\
impelling her to confess it to him, to him, Alyosha, with tears and cries\
and hysterical writhings on the floor. But he dreaded that moment and\
longed to spare her. It made the commission on which he had come even more\
difficult. He spoke of Mitya again.\
\
\'93It\'92s all right, it\'92s all right, don\'92t be anxious about him!\'94 she began\
again, sharply and stubbornly. \'93All that is only momentary, I know him, I\
know his heart only too well. You may be sure he will consent to escape.\
It\'92s not as though it would be immediately; he will have time to make up\
his mind to it. Ivan Fyodorovitch will be well by that time and will\
manage it all himself, so that I shall have nothing to do with it. Don\'92t\
be anxious; he will consent to run away. He has agreed already: do you\
suppose he would give up that creature? And they won\'92t let her go to him,\
so he is bound to escape. It\'92s you he\'92s most afraid of, he is afraid you\
won\'92t approve of his escape on moral grounds. But you must generously\
_allow_ it, if your sanction is so necessary,\'94 Katya added viciously. She\
paused and smiled.\
\
\'93He talks about some hymn,\'94 she went on again, \'93some cross he has to bear,\
some duty; I remember Ivan Fyodorovitch told me a great deal about it, and\
if you knew how he talked!\'94 Katya cried suddenly, with feeling she could\
not repress, \'93if you knew how he loved that wretched man at the moment he\
told me, and how he hated him, perhaps, at the same moment. And I heard\
his story and his tears with sneering disdain. Brute! Yes, I am a brute. I\
am responsible for his fever. But that man in prison is incapable of\
suffering,\'94 Katya concluded irritably. \'93Can such a man suffer? Men like\
him never suffer!\'94\
\
There was a note of hatred and contemptuous repulsion in her words. And\
yet it was she who had betrayed him. \'93Perhaps because she feels how she\'92s\
wronged him she hates him at moments,\'94 Alyosha thought to himself. He\
hoped that it was only \'93at moments.\'94 In Katya\'92s last words he detected a\
challenging note, but he did not take it up.\
\
\'93I sent for you this morning to make you promise to persuade him yourself.\
Or do you, too, consider that to escape would be dishonorable, cowardly,\
or something ... unchristian, perhaps?\'94 Katya added, even more defiantly.\
\
\'93Oh, no. I\'92ll tell him everything,\'94 muttered Alyosha. \'93He asks you to come\
and see him to\uc0\u8208 day,\'94 he blurted out suddenly, looking her steadily in the\
face. She started, and drew back a little from him on the sofa.\
\
\'93Me? Can that be?\'94 she faltered, turning pale.\
\
\'93It can and ought to be!\'94 Alyosha began emphatically, growing more\
animated. \'93He needs you particularly just now. I would not have opened the\
subject and worried you, if it were not necessary. He is ill, he is beside\
himself, he keeps asking for you. It is not to be reconciled with you that\
he wants you, but only that you would go and show yourself at his door. So\
much has happened to him since that day. He realizes that he has injured\
you beyond all reckoning. He does not ask your forgiveness\'97\'91It\'92s\
impossible to forgive me,\'92 he says himself\'97but only that you would show\
yourself in his doorway.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s so sudden....\'94 faltered Katya. \'93I\'92ve had a presentiment all these\
days that you would come with that message. I knew he would ask me to\
come. It\'92s impossible!\'94\
\
\'93Let it be impossible, but do it. Only think, he realizes for the first\
time how he has wounded you, the first time in his life; he had never\
grasped it before so fully. He said, \'91If she refuses to come I shall be\
unhappy all my life.\'92 Do you hear? though he is condemned to penal\
servitude for twenty years, he is still planning to be happy\'97is not that\
piteous? Think\'97you must visit him; though he is ruined, he is innocent,\'94\
broke like a challenge from Alyosha. \'93His hands are clean, there is no\
blood on them! For the sake of his infinite sufferings in the future visit\
him now. Go, greet him on his way into the darkness\'97stand at his door,\
that is all.... You ought to do it, you ought to!\'94 Alyosha concluded,\
laying immense stress on the word \'93ought.\'94\
\
\'93I ought to ... but I cannot....\'94 Katya moaned. \'93He will look at me.... I\
can\'92t.\'94\
\
\'93Your eyes ought to meet. How will you live all your life, if you don\'92t\
make up your mind to do it now?\'94\
\
\'93Better suffer all my life.\'94\
\
\'93You ought to go, you ought to go,\'94 Alyosha repeated with merciless\
emphasis.\
\
\'93But why to\uc0\u8208 day, why at once?... I can\'92t leave our patient\'97\'94\
\
\'93You can for a moment. It will only be a moment. If you don\'92t come, he\
will be in delirium by to\uc0\u8208 night. I would not tell you a lie; have pity on\
him!\'94\
\
\'93Have pity on _me!_\'94 Katya said, with bitter reproach, and she burst into\
tears.\
\
\'93Then you will come,\'94 said Alyosha firmly, seeing her tears. \'93I\'92ll go and\
tell him you will come directly.\'94\
\
\'93No, don\'92t tell him so on any account,\'94 cried Katya in alarm. \'93I will\
come, but don\'92t tell him beforehand, for perhaps I may go, but not go\
in.... I don\'92t know yet\'97\'94\
\
Her voice failed her. She gasped for breath. Alyosha got up to go.\
\
\'93And what if I meet any one?\'94 she said suddenly, in a low voice, turning\
white again.\
\
\'93That\'92s just why you must go now, to avoid meeting any one. There will be\
no one there, I can tell you that for certain. We will expect you,\'94 he\
concluded emphatically, and went out of the room.\
\
\
\
\
Chapter II. For A Moment The Lie Becomes Truth\
\
\
He hurried to the hospital where Mitya was lying now. The day after his\
fate was determined, Mitya had fallen ill with nervous fever, and was sent\
to the prison division of the town hospital. But at the request of several\
persons (Alyosha, Madame Hohlakov, Lise, etc.), Doctor Varvinsky had put\
Mitya not with other prisoners, but in a separate little room, the one\
where Smerdyakov had been. It is true that there was a sentinel at the\
other end of the corridor, and there was a grating over the window, so\
that Varvinsky could be at ease about the indulgence he had shown, which\
was not quite legal, indeed; but he was a kind\uc0\u8208 hearted and compassionate\
young man. He knew how hard it would be for a man like Mitya to pass at\
once so suddenly into the society of robbers and murderers, and that he\
must get used to it by degrees. The visits of relations and friends were\
informally sanctioned by the doctor and overseer, and even by the police\
captain. But only Alyosha and Grushenka had visited Mitya. Rakitin had\
tried to force his way in twice, but Mitya persistently begged Varvinsky\
not to admit him.\
\
Alyosha found him sitting on his bed in a hospital dressing\uc0\u8208 gown, rather\
feverish, with a towel, soaked in vinegar and water, on his head. He\
looked at Alyosha as he came in with an undefined expression, but there\
was a shade of something like dread discernible in it. He had become\
terribly preoccupied since the trial; sometimes he would be silent for\
half an hour together, and seemed to be pondering something heavily and\
painfully, oblivious of everything about him. If he roused himself from\
his brooding and began to talk, he always spoke with a kind of abruptness\
and never of what he really wanted to say. He looked sometimes with a face\
of suffering at his brother. He seemed to be more at ease with Grushenka\
than with Alyosha. It is true, he scarcely spoke to her at all, but as\
soon as she came in, his whole face lighted up with joy.\
\
Alyosha sat down beside him on the bed in silence. This time Mitya was\
waiting for Alyosha in suspense, but he did not dare ask him a question.\
He felt it almost unthinkable that Katya would consent to come, and at the\
same time he felt that if she did not come, something inconceivable would\
happen. Alyosha understood his feelings.\
\
\'93Trifon Borissovitch,\'94 Mitya began nervously, \'93has pulled his whole inn to\
pieces, I am told. He\'92s taken up the flooring, pulled apart the planks,\
split up all the gallery, I am told. He is seeking treasure all the\
time\'97the fifteen hundred roubles which the prosecutor said I\'92d hidden\
there. He began playing these tricks, they say, as soon as he got home.\
Serve him right, the swindler! The guard here told me yesterday; he comes\
from there.\'94\
\
\'93Listen,\'94 began Alyosha. \'93She will come, but I don\'92t know when. Perhaps\
to\uc0\u8208 day, perhaps in a few days, that I can\'92t tell. But she will come, she\
will, that\'92s certain.\'94\
\
Mitya started, would have said something, but was silent. The news had a\
tremendous effect on him. It was evident that he would have liked terribly\
to know what had been said, but he was again afraid to ask. Something\
cruel and contemptuous from Katya would have cut him like a knife at that\
moment.\
\
\'93This was what she said among other things; that I must be sure to set\
your conscience at rest about escaping. If Ivan is not well by then she\
will see to it all herself.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ve spoken of that already,\'94 Mitya observed musingly.\
\
\'93And you have repeated it to Grusha,\'94 observed Alyosha.\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 Mitya admitted. \'93She won\'92t come this morning.\'94 He looked timidly at\
his brother. \'93She won\'92t come till the evening. When I told her yesterday\
that Katya was taking measures, she was silent, but she set her mouth. She\
only whispered, \'91Let her!\'92 She understood that it was important. I did not\
dare to try her further. She understands now, I think, that Katya no\
longer cares for me, but loves Ivan.\'94\
\
\'93Does she?\'94 broke from Alyosha.\
\
\'93Perhaps she does not. Only she is not coming this morning,\'94 Mitya\
hastened to explain again; \'93I asked her to do something for me. You know,\
Ivan is superior to all of us. He ought to live, not us. He will recover.\'94\
\
\'93Would you believe it, though Katya is alarmed about him, she scarcely\
doubts of his recovery,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93That means that she is convinced he will die. It\'92s because she is\
frightened she\'92s so sure he will get well.\'94\
\
\'93Ivan has a strong constitution, and I, too, believe there\'92s every hope\
that he will get well,\'94 Alyosha observed anxiously.\
\
\'93Yes, he will get well. But she is convinced that he will die. She has a\
great deal of sorrow to bear...\'94 A silence followed. A grave anxiety was\
fretting Mitya.\
\
\'93Alyosha, I love Grusha terribly,\'94 he said suddenly in a shaking voice,\
full of tears.\
\
\'93They won\'92t let her go out there to you,\'94 Alyosha put in at once.\
\
\'93And there is something else I wanted to tell you,\'94 Mitya went on, with a\
sudden ring in his voice. \'93If they beat me on the way or out there, I\
won\'92t submit to it. I shall kill some one, and shall be shot for it. And\
this will be going on for twenty years! They speak to me rudely as it is.\
I\'92ve been lying here all night, passing judgment on myself. I am not\
ready! I am not able to resign myself. I wanted to sing a \'91hymn\'92; but if a\
guard speaks rudely to me, I have not the strength to bear it. For Grusha\
I would bear anything ... anything except blows.... But she won\'92t be\
allowed to come there.\'94\
\
Alyosha smiled gently.\
\
\'93Listen, brother, once for all,\'94 he said. \'93This is what I think about it.\
And you know that I would not tell you a lie. Listen: you are not ready,\
and such a cross is not for you. What\'92s more, you don\'92t need such a\
martyr\'92s cross when you are not ready for it. If you had murdered our\
father, it would grieve me that you should reject your punishment. But you\
are innocent, and such a cross is too much for you. You wanted to make\
yourself another man by suffering. I say, only remember that other man\
always, all your life and wherever you go; and that will be enough for\
you. Your refusal of that great cross will only serve to make you feel all\
your life an even greater duty, and that constant feeling will do more to\
make you a new man, perhaps, than if you went there. For there you would\
not endure it and would repine, and perhaps at last would say: \'91I am\
quits.\'92 The lawyer was right about that. Such heavy burdens are not for\
all men. For some they are impossible. These are my thoughts about it, if\
you want them so much. If other men would have to answer for your escape,\
officers or soldiers, then I would not have \'91allowed\'92 you,\'94 smiled\
Alyosha. \'93But they declare\'97the superintendent of that _\'e9tape_ told Ivan\
himself\'97that if it\'92s well managed there will be no great inquiry, and that\
they can get off easily. Of course, bribing is dishonest even in such a\
case, but I can\'92t undertake to judge about it, because if Ivan and Katya\
commissioned me to act for you, I know I should go and give bribes. I must\
tell you the truth. And so I can\'92t judge of your own action. But let me\
assure you that I shall never condemn you. And it would be a strange thing\
if I could judge you in this. Now I think I\'92ve gone into everything.\'94\
\
\'93But I do condemn myself!\'94 cried Mitya. \'93I shall escape, that was settled\
apart from you; could Mitya Karamazov do anything but run away? But I\
shall condemn myself, and I will pray for my sin for ever. That\'92s how the\
Jesuits talk, isn\'92t it? Just as we are doing?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94 Alyosha smiled gently.\
\
\'93I love you for always telling the whole truth and never hiding anything,\'94\
cried Mitya, with a joyful laugh. \'93So I\'92ve caught my Alyosha being\
Jesuitical. I must kiss you for that. Now listen to the rest; I\'92ll open\
the other side of my heart to you. This is what I planned and decided. If\
I run away, even with money and a passport, and even to America, I should\
be cheered up by the thought that I am not running away for pleasure, not\
for happiness, but to another exile as bad, perhaps, as Siberia. It is as\
bad, Alyosha, it is! I hate that America, damn it, already. Even though\
Grusha will be with me. Just look at her; is she an American? She is\
Russian, Russian to the marrow of her bones; she will be homesick for the\
mother country, and I shall see every hour that she is suffering for my\
sake, that she has taken up that cross for me. And what harm has she done?\
And how shall I, too, put up with the rabble out there, though they may be\
better than I, every one of them? I hate that America already! And though\
they may be wonderful at machinery, every one of them, damn them, they are\
not of my soul. I love Russia, Alyosha, I love the Russian God, though I\
am a scoundrel myself. I shall choke there!\'94 he exclaimed, his eyes\
suddenly flashing. His voice was trembling with tears. \'93So this is what\
I\'92ve decided, Alyosha, listen,\'94 he began again, mastering his emotion. \'93As\
soon as I arrive there with Grusha, we will set to work at once on the\
land, in solitude, somewhere very remote, with wild bears. There must be\
some remote parts even there. I am told there are still Redskins there,\
somewhere, on the edge of the horizon. So to the country of the _Last of\
the Mohicans_, and there we\'92ll tackle the grammar at once, Grusha and I.\
Work and grammar\'97that\'92s how we\'92ll spend three years. And by that time we\
shall speak English like any Englishman. And as soon as we\'92ve learnt\
it\'97good\uc0\u8208 by to America! We\'92ll run here to Russia as American citizens.\
Don\'92t be uneasy\'97we would not come to this little town. We\'92d hide\
somewhere, a long way off, in the north or in the south. I shall be\
changed by that time, and she will, too, in America. The doctors shall\
make me some sort of wart on my face\'97what\'92s the use of their being so\
mechanical!\'97or else I\'92ll put out one eye, let my beard grow a yard, and I\
shall turn gray, fretting for Russia. I dare say they won\'92t recognize us.\
And if they do, let them send us to Siberia. I don\'92t care. It will show\
it\'92s our fate. We\'92ll work on the land here, too, somewhere in the wilds,\
and I\'92ll make up as an American all my life. But we shall die on our own\
soil. That\'92s my plan, and it shan\'92t be altered. Do you approve?\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 said Alyosha, not wanting to contradict him. Mitya paused for a\
minute and said suddenly:\
\
\'93And how they worked it up at the trial! Didn\'92t they work it up!\'94\
\
\'93If they had not, you would have been convicted just the same,\'94 said\
Alyosha, with a sigh.\
\
\'93Yes, people are sick of me here! God bless them, but it\'92s hard,\'94 Mitya\
moaned miserably. Again there was silence for a minute.\
\
\'93Alyosha, put me out of my misery at once!\'94 he exclaimed suddenly. \'93Tell\
me, is she coming now, or not? Tell me? What did she say? How did she say\
it?\'94\
\
\'93She said she would come, but I don\'92t know whether she will come to\uc0\u8208 day.\
It\'92s hard for her, you know,\'94 Alyosha looked timidly at his brother.\
\
\'93I should think it is hard for her! Alyosha, it will drive me out of my\
mind. Grusha keeps looking at me. She understands. My God, calm my heart:\
what is it I want? I want Katya! Do I understand what I want? It\'92s the\
headstrong, evil Karamazov spirit! No, I am not fit for suffering. I am a\
scoundrel, that\'92s all one can say.\'94\
\
\'93Here she is!\'94 cried Alyosha.\
\
At that instant Katya appeared in the doorway. For a moment she stood\
still, gazing at Mitya with a dazed expression. He leapt impulsively to\
his feet, and a scared look came into his face. He turned pale, but a\
timid, pleading smile appeared on his lips at once, and with an\
irresistible impulse he held out both hands to Katya. Seeing it, she flew\
impetuously to him. She seized him by the hands, and almost by force made\
him sit down on the bed. She sat down beside him, and still keeping his\
hands pressed them violently. Several times they both strove to speak, but\
stopped short and again gazed speechless with a strange smile, their eyes\
fastened on one another. So passed two minutes.\
\
\'93Have you forgiven me?\'94 Mitya faltered at last, and at the same moment\
turning to Alyosha, his face working with joy, he cried, \'93Do you hear what\
I am asking, do you hear?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s what I loved you for, that you are generous at heart!\'94 broke from\
Katya. \'93My forgiveness is no good to you, nor yours to me; whether you\
forgive me or not, you will always be a sore place in my heart, and I in\
yours\'97so it must be....\'94 She stopped to take breath. \'93What have I come\
for?\'94 she began again with nervous haste: \'93to embrace your feet, to press\
your hands like this, till it hurts\'97you remember how in Moscow I used to\
squeeze them\'97to tell you again that you are my god, my joy, to tell you\
that I love you madly,\'94 she moaned in anguish, and suddenly pressed his\
hand greedily to her lips. Tears streamed from her eyes. Alyosha stood\
speechless and confounded; he had never expected what he was seeing.\
\
\'93Love is over, Mitya!\'94 Katya began again, \'93but the past is painfully dear\
to me. Know that you will always be so. But now let what might have been\
come true for one minute,\'94 she faltered, with a drawn smile, looking into\
his face joyfully again. \'93You love another woman, and I love another man,\
and yet I shall love you for ever, and you will love me; do you know that?\
Do you hear? Love me, love me all your life!\'94 she cried, with a quiver\
almost of menace in her voice.\
\
\'93I shall love you, and ... do you know, Katya,\'94 Mitya began, drawing a\
deep breath at each word, \'93do you know, five days ago, that same evening,\
I loved you.... When you fell down and were carried out ... All my life!\
So it will be, so it will always be\'97\'94\
\
So they murmured to one another frantic words, almost meaningless, perhaps\
not even true, but at that moment it was all true, and they both believed\
what they said implicitly.\
\
\'93Katya,\'94 cried Mitya suddenly, \'93do you believe I murdered him? I know you\
don\'92t believe it now, but then ... when you gave evidence.... Surely,\
surely you did not believe it!\'94\
\
\'93I did not believe it even then. I\'92ve never believed it. I hated you, and\
for a moment I persuaded myself. While I was giving evidence I persuaded\
myself and believed it, but when I\'92d finished speaking I left off\
believing it at once. Don\'92t doubt that! I have forgotten that I came here\
to punish myself,\'94 she said, with a new expression in her voice, quite\
unlike the loving tones of a moment before.\
\
\'93Woman, yours is a heavy burden,\'94 broke, as it were, involuntarily from\
Mitya.\
\
\'93Let me go,\'94 she whispered. \'93I\'92ll come again. It\'92s more than I can bear\
now.\'94\
\
She was getting up from her place, but suddenly uttered a loud scream and\
staggered back. Grushenka walked suddenly and noiselessly into the room.\
No one had expected her. Katya moved swiftly to the door, but when she\
reached Grushenka, she stopped suddenly, turned as white as chalk and\
moaned softly, almost in a whisper:\
\
\'93Forgive me!\'94\
\
Grushenka stared at her and, pausing for an instant, in a vindictive,\
venomous voice, answered:\
\
\'93We are full of hatred, my girl, you and I! We are both full of hatred! As\
though we could forgive one another! Save him, and I\'92ll worship you all my\
life.\'94\
\
\'93You won\'92t forgive her!\'94 cried Mitya, with frantic reproach.\
\
\'93Don\'92t be anxious, I\'92ll save him for you!\'94 Katya whispered rapidly, and\
she ran out of the room.\
\
\'93And you could refuse to forgive her when she begged your forgiveness\
herself?\'94 Mitya exclaimed bitterly again.\
\
\'93Mitya, don\'92t dare to blame her; you have no right to!\'94 Alyosha cried\
hotly.\
\
\'93Her proud lips spoke, not her heart,\'94 Grushenka brought out in a tone of\
disgust. \'93If she saves you I\'92ll forgive her everything\'97\'94\
\
She stopped speaking, as though suppressing something. She could not yet\
recover herself. She had come in, as appeared afterwards, accidentally,\
with no suspicion of what she would meet.\
\
\'93Alyosha, run after her!\'94 Mitya cried to his brother; \'93tell her ... I\
don\'92t know ... don\'92t let her go away like this!\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll come to you again at nightfall,\'94 said Alyosha, and he ran after\
Katya. He overtook her outside the hospital grounds. She was walking fast,\
but as soon as Alyosha caught her up she said quickly:\
\
\'93No, before that woman I can\'92t punish myself! I asked her forgiveness\
because I wanted to punish myself to the bitter end. She would not forgive\
me.... I like her for that!\'94 she added, in an unnatural voice, and her\
eyes flashed with fierce resentment.\
\
\'93My brother did not expect this in the least,\'94 muttered Alyosha. \'93He was\
sure she would not come\'97\'94\
\
\'93No doubt. Let us leave that,\'94 she snapped. \'93Listen: I can\'92t go with you\
to the funeral now. I\'92ve sent them flowers. I think they still have money.\
If necessary, tell them I\'92ll never abandon them.... Now leave me, leave\
me, please. You are late as it is\'97the bells are ringing for the\
service.... Leave me, please!\'94\
\
\
\
\
Chapter III. Ilusha\'92s Funeral. The Speech At The Stone\
\
\
He really was late. They had waited for him and had already decided to\
bear the pretty flower\uc0\u8208 decked little coffin to the church without him. It\
was the coffin of poor little Ilusha. He had died two days after Mitya was\
sentenced. At the gate of the house Alyosha was met by the shouts of the\
boys, Ilusha\'92s schoolfellows. They had all been impatiently expecting him\
and were glad that he had come at last. There were about twelve of them,\
they all had their school\uc0\u8208 bags or satchels on their shoulders. \'93Father\
will cry, be with father,\'94 Ilusha had told them as he lay dying, and the\
boys remembered it. Kolya Krassotkin was the foremost of them.\
\
\'93How glad I am you\'92ve come, Karamazov!\'94 he cried, holding out his hand to\
Alyosha. \'93It\'92s awful here. It\'92s really horrible to see it. Snegiryov is\
not drunk, we know for a fact he\'92s had nothing to drink to\uc0\u8208 day, but he\
seems as if he were drunk ... I am always manly, but this is awful.\
Karamazov, if I am not keeping you, one question before you go in?\'94\
\
\'93What is it, Kolya?\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93Is your brother innocent or guilty? Was it he killed your father or was\
it the valet? As you say, so it will be. I haven\'92t slept for the last four\
nights for thinking of it.\'94\
\
\'93The valet killed him, my brother is innocent,\'94 answered Alyosha.\
\
\'93That\'92s what I said,\'94 cried Smurov.\
\
\'93So he will perish an innocent victim!\'94 exclaimed Kolya; \'93though he is\
ruined he is happy! I could envy him!\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean? How can you? Why?\'94 cried Alyosha surprised.\
\
\'93Oh, if I, too, could sacrifice myself some day for truth!\'94 said Kolya\
with enthusiasm.\
\
\'93But not in such a cause, not with such disgrace and such horror!\'94 said\
Alyosha.\
\
\'93Of course ... I should like to die for all humanity, and as for disgrace,\
I don\'92t care about that\'97our names may perish. I respect your brother!\'94\
\
\'93And so do I!\'94 the boy, who had once declared that he knew who had founded\
Troy, cried suddenly and unexpectedly, and he blushed up to his ears like\
a peony as he had done on that occasion.\
\
Alyosha went into the room. Ilusha lay with his hands folded and his eyes\
closed in a blue coffin with a white frill round it. His thin face was\
hardly changed at all, and strange to say there was no smell of decay from\
the corpse. The expression of his face was serious and, as it were,\
thoughtful. His hands, crossed over his breast, looked particularly\
beautiful, as though chiseled in marble. There were flowers in his hands\
and the coffin, inside and out, was decked with flowers, which had been\
sent early in the morning by Lise Hohlakov. But there were flowers too\
from Katerina Ivanovna, and when Alyosha opened the door, the captain had\
a bunch in his trembling hands and was strewing them again over his dear\
boy. He scarcely glanced at Alyosha when he came in, and he would not look\
at any one, even at his crazy weeping wife, \'93mamma,\'94 who kept trying to\
stand on her crippled legs to get a nearer look at her dead boy. Nina had\
been pushed in her chair by the boys close up to the coffin. She sat with\
her head pressed to it and she too was no doubt quietly weeping.\
Snegiryov\'92s face looked eager, yet bewildered and exasperated. There was\
something crazy about his gestures and the words that broke from him. \'93Old\
man, dear old man!\'94 he exclaimed every minute, gazing at Ilusha. It was\
his habit to call Ilusha \'93old man,\'94 as a term of affection when he was\
alive.\
\
\'93Father, give me a flower, too; take that white one out of his hand and\
give it me,\'94 the crazy mother begged, whimpering. Either because the\
little white rose in Ilusha\'92s hand had caught her fancy or that she wanted\
one from his hand to keep in memory of him, she moved restlessly,\
stretching out her hands for the flower.\
\
\'93I won\'92t give it to any one, I won\'92t give you anything,\'94 Snegiryov cried\
callously. \'93They are his flowers, not yours! Everything is his, nothing is\
yours!\'94\
\
\'93Father, give mother a flower!\'94 said Nina, lifting her face wet with\
tears.\
\
\'93I won\'92t give away anything and to her less than any one! She didn\'92t love\
Ilusha. She took away his little cannon and he gave it to her,\'94 the\
captain broke into loud sobs at the thought of how Ilusha had given up his\
cannon to his mother. The poor, crazy creature was bathed in noiseless\
tears, hiding her face in her hands.\
\
The boys, seeing that the father would not leave the coffin and that it\
was time to carry it out, stood round it in a close circle and began to\
lift it up.\
\
\'93I don\'92t want him to be buried in the churchyard,\'94 Snegiryov wailed\
suddenly; \'93I\'92ll bury him by the stone, by our stone! Ilusha told me to. I\
won\'92t let him be carried out!\'94\
\
He had been saying for the last three days that he would bury him by the\
stone, but Alyosha, Krassotkin, the landlady, her sister and all the boys\
interfered.\
\
\'93What an idea, bury him by an unholy stone, as though he had hanged\
himself!\'94 the old landlady said sternly. \'93There in the churchyard the\
ground has been crossed. He\'92ll be prayed for there. One can hear the\
singing in church and the deacon reads so plainly and verbally that it\
will reach him every time just as though it were read over his grave.\'94\
\
At last the captain made a gesture of despair as though to say, \'93Take him\
where you will.\'94 The boys raised the coffin, but as they passed the\
mother, they stopped for a moment and lowered it that she might say good\uc0\u8208 \
by to Ilusha. But on seeing that precious little face, which for the last\
three days she had only looked at from a distance, she trembled all over\
and her gray head began twitching spasmodically over the coffin.\
\
\'93Mother, make the sign of the cross over him, give him your blessing, kiss\
him,\'94 Nina cried to her. But her head still twitched like an automaton and\
with a face contorted with bitter grief she began, without a word, beating\
her breast with her fist. They carried the coffin past her. Nina pressed\
her lips to her brother\'92s for the last time as they bore the coffin by\
her. As Alyosha went out of the house he begged the landlady to look after\
those who were left behind, but she interrupted him before he had\
finished.\
\
\'93To be sure, I\'92ll stay with them, we are Christians, too.\'94 The old woman\
wept as she said it.\
\
They had not far to carry the coffin to the church, not more than three\
hundred paces. It was a still, clear day, with a slight frost. The church\
bells were still ringing. Snegiryov ran fussing and distracted after the\
coffin, in his short old summer overcoat, with his head bare and his soft,\
old, wide\uc0\u8208 brimmed hat in his hand. He seemed in a state of bewildered\
anxiety. At one minute he stretched out his hand to support the head of\
the coffin and only hindered the bearers, at another he ran alongside and\
tried to find a place for himself there. A flower fell on the snow and he\
rushed to pick it up as though everything in the world depended on the\
loss of that flower.\
\
\'93And the crust of bread, we\'92ve forgotten the crust!\'94 he cried suddenly in\
dismay. But the boys reminded him at once that he had taken the crust of\
bread already and that it was in his pocket. He instantly pulled it out\
and was reassured.\
\
\'93Ilusha told me to, Ilusha,\'94 he explained at once to Alyosha. \'93I was\
sitting by him one night and he suddenly told me: \'91Father, when my grave\
is filled up crumble a piece of bread on it so that the sparrows may fly\
down, I shall hear and it will cheer me up not to be lying alone.\'92 \'94\
\
\'93That\'92s a good thing,\'94 said Alyosha, \'93we must often take some.\'94\
\
\'93Every day, every day!\'94 said the captain quickly, seeming cheered at the\
thought.\
\
They reached the church at last and set the coffin in the middle of it.\
The boys surrounded it and remained reverently standing so, all through\
the service. It was an old and rather poor church; many of the ikons were\
without settings; but such churches are the best for praying in. During\
the mass Snegiryov became somewhat calmer, though at times he had\
outbursts of the same unconscious and, as it were, incoherent anxiety. At\
one moment he went up to the coffin to set straight the cover or the\
wreath, when a candle fell out of the candlestick he rushed to replace it\
and was a fearful time fumbling over it, then he subsided and stood\
quietly by the coffin with a look of blank uneasiness and perplexity.\
After the Epistle he suddenly whispered to Alyosha, who was standing\
beside him, that the Epistle had not been read properly but did not\
explain what he meant. During the prayer, \'93Like the Cherubim,\'94 he joined\
in the singing but did not go on to the end. Falling on his knees, he\
pressed his forehead to the stone floor and lay so for a long while.\
\
At last came the funeral service itself and candles were distributed. The\
distracted father began fussing about again, but the touching and\
impressive funeral prayers moved and roused his soul. He seemed suddenly\
to shrink together and broke into rapid, short sobs, which he tried at\
first to smother, but at last he sobbed aloud. When they began taking\
leave of the dead and closing the coffin, he flung his arms about, as\
though he would not allow them to cover Ilusha, and began greedily and\
persistently kissing his dead boy on the lips. At last they succeeded in\
persuading him to come away from the step, but suddenly he impulsively\
stretched out his hand and snatched a few flowers from the coffin. He\
looked at them and a new idea seemed to dawn upon him, so that he\
apparently forgot his grief for a minute. Gradually he seemed to sink into\
brooding and did not resist when the coffin was lifted up and carried to\
the grave. It was an expensive one in the churchyard close to the church,\
Katerina Ivanovna had paid for it. After the customary rites the grave\uc0\u8208 \
diggers lowered the coffin. Snegiryov with his flowers in his hands bent\
down so low over the open grave that the boys caught hold of his coat in\
alarm and pulled him back. He did not seem to understand fully what was\
happening. When they began filling up the grave, he suddenly pointed\
anxiously at the falling earth and began trying to say something, but no\
one could make out what he meant, and he stopped suddenly. Then he was\
reminded that he must crumble the bread and he was awfully excited,\
snatched up the bread and began pulling it to pieces and flinging the\
morsels on the grave.\
\
\'93Come, fly down, birds, fly down, sparrows!\'94 he muttered anxiously.\
\
One of the boys observed that it was awkward for him to crumble the bread\
with the flowers in his hands and suggested he should give them to some\
one to hold for a time. But he would not do this and seemed indeed\
suddenly alarmed for his flowers, as though they wanted to take them from\
him altogether. And after looking at the grave, and as it were, satisfying\
himself that everything had been done and the bread had been crumbled, he\
suddenly, to the surprise of every one, turned, quite composedly even, and\
made his way homewards. But his steps became more and more hurried, he\
almost ran. The boys and Alyosha kept up with him.\
\
\'93The flowers are for mamma, the flowers are for mamma! I was unkind to\
mamma,\'94 he began exclaiming suddenly.\
\
Some one called to him to put on his hat as it was cold. But he flung the\
hat in the snow as though he were angry and kept repeating, \'93I won\'92t have\
the hat, I won\'92t have the hat.\'94 Smurov picked it up and carried it after\
him. All the boys were crying, and Kolya and the boy who discovered about\
Troy most of all. Though Smurov, with the captain\'92s hat in his hand, was\
crying bitterly too, he managed, as he ran, to snatch up a piece of red\
brick that lay on the snow of the path, to fling it at the flock of\
sparrows that was flying by. He missed them, of course, and went on crying\
as he ran. Half\uc0\u8208 way, Snegiryov suddenly stopped, stood still for half a\
minute, as though struck by something, and suddenly turning back to the\
church, ran towards the deserted grave. But the boys instantly overtook\
him and caught hold of him on all sides. Then he fell helpless on the snow\
as though he had been knocked down, and struggling, sobbing, and wailing,\
he began crying out, \'93Ilusha, old man, dear old man!\'94 Alyosha and Kolya\
tried to make him get up, soothing and persuading him.\
\
\'93Captain, give over, a brave man must show fortitude,\'94 muttered Kolya.\
\
\'93You\'92ll spoil the flowers,\'94 said Alyosha, \'93and mamma is expecting them,\
she is sitting crying because you would not give her any before. Ilusha\'92s\
little bed is still there\'97\'94\
\
\'93Yes, yes, mamma!\'94 Snegiryov suddenly recollected, \'93they\'92ll take away the\
bed, they\'92ll take it away,\'94 he added as though alarmed that they really\
would. He jumped up and ran homewards again. But it was not far off and\
they all arrived together. Snegiryov opened the door hurriedly and called\
to his wife with whom he had so cruelly quarreled just before:\
\
\'93Mamma, poor crippled darling, Ilusha has sent you these flowers,\'94 he\
cried, holding out to her a little bunch of flowers that had been frozen\
and broken while he was struggling in the snow. But at that instant he saw\
in the corner, by the little bed, Ilusha\'92s little boots, which the\
landlady had put tidily side by side. Seeing the old, patched, rusty\uc0\u8208 \
looking, stiff boots he flung up his hands and rushed to them, fell on his\
knees, snatched up one boot and, pressing his lips to it, began kissing it\
greedily, crying, \'93Ilusha, old man, dear old man, where are your little\
feet?\'94\
\
\'93Where have you taken him away? Where have you taken him?\'94 the lunatic\
cried in a heartrending voice. Nina, too, broke into sobs. Kolya ran out\
of the room, the boys followed him. At last Alyosha too went out.\
\
\'93Let them weep,\'94 he said to Kolya, \'93it\'92s no use trying to comfort them\
just now. Let us wait a minute and then go back.\'94\
\
\'93No, it\'92s no use, it\'92s awful,\'94 Kolya assented. \'93Do you know, Karamazov,\'94\
he dropped his voice so that no one could hear them, \'93I feel dreadfully\
sad, and if it were only possible to bring him back, I\'92d give anything in\
the world to do it.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, so would I,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93What do you think, Karamazov? Had we better come back here to\uc0\u8208 night?\
He\'92ll be drunk, you know.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps he will. Let us come together, you and I, that will be enough, to\
spend an hour with them, with the mother and Nina. If we all come together\
we shall remind them of everything again,\'94 Alyosha suggested.\
\
\'93The landlady is laying the table for them now\'97there\'92ll be a funeral\
dinner or something, the priest is coming; shall we go back to it,\
Karamazov?\'94\
\
\'93Of course,\'94 said Alyosha.\
\
\'93It\'92s all so strange, Karamazov, such sorrow and then pancakes after it,\
it all seems so unnatural in our religion.\'94\
\
\'93They are going to have salmon, too,\'94 the boy who had discovered about\
Troy observed in a loud voice.\
\
\'93I beg you most earnestly, Kartashov, not to interrupt again with your\
idiotic remarks, especially when one is not talking to you and doesn\'92t\
care to know whether you exist or not!\'94 Kolya snapped out irritably. The\
boy flushed crimson but did not dare to reply.\
\
Meantime they were strolling slowly along the path and suddenly Smurov\
exclaimed:\
\
\'93There\'92s Ilusha\'92s stone, under which they wanted to bury him.\'94\
\
They all stood still by the big stone. Alyosha looked and the whole\
picture of what Snegiryov had described to him that day, how Ilusha,\
weeping and hugging his father, had cried, \'93Father, father, how he\
insulted you,\'94 rose at once before his imagination.\
\
A sudden impulse seemed to come into his soul. With a serious and earnest\
expression he looked from one to another of the bright, pleasant faces of\
Ilusha\'92s schoolfellows, and suddenly said to them:\
\
\'93Boys, I should like to say one word to you, here at this place.\'94\
\
The boys stood round him and at once bent attentive and expectant eyes\
upon him.\
\
\'93Boys, we shall soon part. I shall be for some time with my two brothers,\
of whom one is going to Siberia and the other is lying at death\'92s door.\
But soon I shall leave this town, perhaps for a long time, so we shall\
part. Let us make a compact here, at Ilusha\'92s stone, that we will never\
forget Ilusha and one another. And whatever happens to us later in life,\
if we don\'92t meet for twenty years afterwards, let us always remember how\
we buried the poor boy at whom we once threw stones, do you remember, by\
the bridge? and afterwards we all grew so fond of him. He was a fine boy,\
a kind\uc0\u8208 hearted, brave boy, he felt for his father\'92s honor and resented the\
cruel insult to him and stood up for him. And so in the first place, we\
will remember him, boys, all our lives. And even if we are occupied with\
most important things, if we attain to honor or fall into great\
misfortune\'97still let us remember how good it was once here, when we were\
all together, united by a good and kind feeling which made us, for the\
time we were loving that poor boy, better perhaps than we are. My little\
doves\'97let me call you so, for you are very like them, those pretty blue\
birds, at this minute as I look at your good dear faces. My dear children,\
perhaps you won\'92t understand what I am saying to you, because I often\
speak very unintelligibly, but you\'92ll remember it all the same and will\
agree with my words some time. You must know that there is nothing higher\
and stronger and more wholesome and good for life in the future than some\
good memory, especially a memory of childhood, of home. People talk to you\
a great deal about your education, but some good, sacred memory, preserved\
from childhood, is perhaps the best education. If a man carries many such\
memories with him into life, he is safe to the end of his days, and if one\
has only one good memory left in one\'92s heart, even that may sometime be\
the means of saving us. Perhaps we may even grow wicked later on, may be\
unable to refrain from a bad action, may laugh at men\'92s tears and at those\
people who say as Kolya did just now, \'91I want to suffer for all men,\'92 and\
may even jeer spitefully at such people. But however bad we may\
become\'97which God forbid\'97yet, when we recall how we buried Ilusha, how we\
loved him in his last days, and how we have been talking like friends all\
together, at this stone, the cruelest and most mocking of us\'97if we do\
become so\'97will not dare to laugh inwardly at having been kind and good at\
this moment! What\'92s more, perhaps, that one memory may keep him from great\
evil and he will reflect and say, \'91Yes, I was good and brave and honest\
then!\'92 Let him laugh to himself, that\'92s no matter, a man often laughs at\
what\'92s good and kind. That\'92s only from thoughtlessness. But I assure you,\
boys, that as he laughs he will say at once in his heart, \'91No, I do wrong\
to laugh, for that\'92s not a thing to laugh at.\'92 \'94\
\
\'93That will be so, I understand you, Karamazov!\'94 cried Kolya, with flashing\
eyes.\
\
The boys were excited and they, too, wanted to say something, but they\
restrained themselves, looking with intentness and emotion at the speaker.\
\
\'93I say this in case we become bad,\'94 Alyosha went on, \'93but there\'92s no\
reason why we should become bad, is there, boys? Let us be, first and\
above all, kind, then honest and then let us never forget each other! I\
say that again. I give you my word for my part that I\'92ll never forget one\
of you. Every face looking at me now I shall remember even for thirty\
years. Just now Kolya said to Kartashov that we did not care to know\
whether he exists or not. But I cannot forget that Kartashov exists and\
that he is not blushing now as he did when he discovered the founders of\
Troy, but is looking at me with his jolly, kind, dear little eyes. Boys,\
my dear boys, let us all be generous and brave like Ilusha, clever, brave\
and generous like Kolya (though he will be ever so much cleverer when he\
is grown up), and let us all be as modest, as clever and sweet as\
Kartashov. But why am I talking about those two? You are all dear to me,\
boys, from this day forth, I have a place in my heart for you all, and I\
beg you to keep a place in your hearts for me! Well, and who has united us\
in this kind, good feeling which we shall remember and intend to remember\
all our lives? Who, if not Ilusha, the good boy, the dear boy, precious to\
us for ever! Let us never forget him. May his memory live for ever in our\
hearts from this time forth!\'94\
\
\'93Yes, yes, for ever, for ever!\'94 the boys cried in their ringing voices,\
with softened faces.\
\
\'93Let us remember his face and his clothes and his poor little boots, his\
coffin and his unhappy, sinful father, and how boldly he stood up for him\
alone against the whole school.\'94\
\
\'93We will remember, we will remember,\'94 cried the boys. \'93He was brave, he\
was good!\'94\
\
\'93Ah, how I loved him!\'94 exclaimed Kolya.\
\
\'93Ah, children, ah, dear friends, don\'92t be afraid of life! How good life is\
when one does something good and just!\'94\
\
\'93Yes, yes,\'94 the boys repeated enthusiastically.\
\
\'93Karamazov, we love you!\'94 a voice, probably Kartashov\'92s, cried\
impulsively.\
\
\'93We love you, we love you!\'94 they all caught it up. There were tears in the\
eyes of many of them.\
\
\'93Hurrah for Karamazov!\'94 Kolya shouted ecstatically.\
\
\'93And may the dead boy\'92s memory live for ever!\'94 Alyosha added again with\
feeling.\
\
\'93For ever!\'94 the boys chimed in again.\
\
\'93Karamazov,\'94 cried Kolya, \'93can it be true what\'92s taught us in religion,\
that we shall all rise again from the dead and shall live and see each\
other again, all, Ilusha too?\'94\
\
\'93Certainly we shall all rise again, certainly we shall see each other and\
shall tell each other with joy and gladness all that has happened!\'94\
Alyosha answered, half laughing, half enthusiastic.\
\
\'93Ah, how splendid it will be!\'94 broke from Kolya.\
\
\'93Well, now we will finish talking and go to his funeral dinner. Don\'92t be\
put out at our eating pancakes\'97it\'92s a very old custom and there\'92s\
something nice in that!\'94 laughed Alyosha. \'93Well, let us go! And now we go\
hand in hand.\'94\
\
\'93And always so, all our lives hand in hand! Hurrah for Karamazov!\'94 Kolya\
cried once more rapturously, and once more the boys took up his\
exclamation: \'93Hurrah for Karamazov!\'94\
\
THE END\
\
\
\
\
\
\
FOOTNOTES\
\
\
    1 In Russian, \'93silen.\'94\
\
    2 A proverbial expression in Russia.\
\
    3 Grushenka.\
\
    4 i.e. setter dog.\
\
    5 Probably the public event was the Decabrist plot against the Tsar,\
      of December 1825, in which the most distinguished men in Russia were\
      concerned.\'97TRANSLATOR\'92S NOTE.\
\
    6 When a monk\'92s body is carried out from the cell to the church and\
      from the church to the graveyard, the canticle \'93What earthly joy...\'94\
      is sung. If the deceased was a priest as well as a monk the canticle\
      \'93Our Helper and Defender\'94 is sung instead.\
\
    7 i.e. a chime of bells.\
\
    8 Literally: \'93Did you get off with a long nose made at you?\'94\'97a\
      proverbial expression in Russia for failure.\
\
    9 Gogol is meant.\
}